I -- My good resolutions. -- The sea! -- My first attempts at swimming.
I'm so happy to be on holiday! I'm here, what luck! I'm writing it down, how funny!
When you're twelve, you don't write much about your life. To tell the truth, you've had quite enough of scratching the paper, and when class and study are closed, you're more likely to put marbles than a penholder between your fingers. For me, who gallops for half an hour in our courtyard just for the pleasure of galloping; for me, who still holds study in the highest esteem, I am quite astonished to find myself smearing paper on the second day of my holidays.
This strange idea came to me yesterday. The prizes were being distributed at Louis-le-Grand, and I have done so little work this year, but so little, that this great day left me cold. However, when I stood in front of the podium, I felt some sort of remorse, and when the words "classe de sixième" were pronounced, I would have gladly pulled my hair out.
I wasn't completely absent from the stage, my name was being called at the accessits; but the accessits make you play the role of a ghost: it's of an invisible person that we seem to be talking.
My cousin Edmond won all the prizes. For a moment I turned away and, through a clearing in the sky, I saw the parents' bench, with my mother and Edmond's mother in the front row. Edmond's mother was crying with joy, while mine was in pain. Something stirred under my waistcoat, and if I hadn't been surrounded by my comrades, I think I would have cried. So I could have given my mother the same joy that shone on my aunt's face, but I didn't want to; I didn't want to, because Edmond is a strong man, thanks to his work above all, and our teacher has told me a hundred times: "Robert, if you wanted to!
Yes, if at the beginning of the year I had thought what I thought, if I had seen what I saw, my name would have rang out more than once as a laureate, and my mother would have wept with joy.
I was furious and I said to myself: How can I control my rage? How can I remember at the start of the school year that I want prizes next year, that I need them?
All sorts of baroque ideas ran through my head: I would have agreed to get a tattoo, I would have written on my arm, in Indian ink: Remember! or drawn a symbolic laurel leaf on my hand. Finally, I felt around in my pockets and discovered a notebook on which my pen hadn't been much use: the pencil wasn't even sharpened.
With the help of my teeth and nails, I scratched it a bit and wrote first the date of the first day of school, then the words: "Souviens-toi!
In the evening I showed Mum my little note: she thought I had done well to set my resolution; I had the idea of transcribing it onto a large red notebook that had never seen ink; thus was born my holiday diary: I hope to continue it.
Will I continue this diary? I've been asking myself that for two days now, looking sideways at this big red notebook that I've had so elegantly bound. To be free! To have no classes, no studies, no books, and to get your fingers dirty with ink! Shocking! And it's so hot!
This is my fourth day off, and I'm starting to... -- well, I'll just say it, bored. Play gets boring, you feel heavy when you're doing nothing, heavy and dazed. Writing my diary would be a distraction for me, it would be like an amusing assignment that I could reread. I'm going to carry on with it, and if I'm already bored, we'll see.
My cousin Louis came to see me today. He's quite a good boy, my cousin Louis, but what a sulky boy he is! I say he's a good boy because that's what people always say, because I don't think he's good for his mother, his sister or his friends. Today he laughed because he heard me call Mum's old maid 'my maid', whom I've known since I met anyone. He set me up with such a saw that it broke my skin. His 'yes, baby' and his 'tell me about it, kid' irritated the hell out of me. When he said to me as he was leaving: "Many happy returns to your wife", I shot up to the attic where Julie was ironing and, without taking a breath, I banged my fist on the table and shouted: "From now on I'm going to call you Julie, do you hear?
She heard, she understood, she turned pale, then red, and I saw big tears rolling down her eyes. I jumped up on the table, risking tipping over the irons, the water and the poison, and kissed her, saying: "My poor old maid, I'm only joking".
She took me at my word and wiped her eyes. What a fool Louis is with his grandiose airs! Am I a fool myself to go and upset my poor old maid Julie just to please him? She's good to Mum, she's good to everyone, I'll call her 'my maid' for Louis' sake. He has a red moustache that makes him very proud, but I'm going to have a moustache too and I'm not going to put on airs about it. Let him wear his moustache and his ingratitude! My uncle Bellavan, who is five foot eight and has the beard of a pasha, also has an old maid who is on first-name terms with him.
We're still in Paris, and I'm roasting with envy to be in the country. Mama would like to rent a cottage in Enghien, half with Louis's mother. I don't know Enghien, but I know there's a lake there and I'm as excited as a fish.
Today my aunt came to make arrangements for Enghien; it was sweltering hot. Louis followed me into the dining room and lay down on the sofa. He pulled some ugly coloured and illustrated newspapers out of his pocket and said some very funny things. If my mother could only hear him!
Perhaps I should tell Mummy what he said to me, but reporting is very ugly. I'm really embarrassed.
I'm not going to say anything, firstly because I don't like selling out my friends, and secondly because if Mum knew Louis inside out, it would stop her going to Enghien, where there's a lake.
I'm very uncomfortable. It's as if a voice is always singing to me: "Tell your mother, tell your mother"; it's as if a little spiral is spinning inside me. I'm all funny and grumpy.
Maybe it's not telling a secret to your mother.
I told her everything, it was so annoying to feel the little spiral inside me spinning. Mum was stunned. Louis! a role model! She wanted proof: I ran across the street to the newsagent and bought the caricatures that Louis had shown me, laughing. My mother had no more doubts and kissed me to thank me for obeying my conscience.
She explained to me the difference between vile espionage and the testimony of trust given to those in charge of us, and I answered her questions about Louis very sincerely.
But I was overwhelmed when she said to me: "My child, thank you; I'll write to your aunt straight away. I can still refuse her proposal.
- Oh, my God, and the lake!" I cried plaintively.
- Of course we'll run away from the lake, my Robert," she said, "or rather we'll run away from Louis, who gives you such bad advice; but since you've shown yourself to be conscientious, I'll reward you, I'll make all the necessary sacrifices of money and we'll go as far as the sea.
I jumped on his neck! The sea! But that's my dream! The sea is my passion! Let Louis keep his lake and his awful newspapers, we'll go to the sea, it'll be much more fun.
When I left Mum, I counted what I had in my purse; I'm going to need a lot of things: fine string for nets, hooks, a line, espadrilles, a treatise on fishing, etc.; my twenty francs will go.
Mum has written to my aunt, and I've set Louis's newspapers alight. Down with the lake, long live the sea!
The days and hours seem endless. Always being in this oven called Paris when the ocean is calling you!
We're definitely going to Saint-Pierre, where we'll find my Uncle Alphonse, my Aunt Fanny and a bunch of cousins.
The only thing that bothers me is a little girl. I've noticed that little girls are often difficult, talkative, boring and complain about everything like nervous ladies.
As someone who wants to become an officer, I don't intend to spend my time carrying a doll or a parasol for a little lady who invites me to her dinners.
Mum read this over my shoulder and scolded me, saying she didn't think I was that selfish.
I promised to be very polite to my cousin Berthe, who is ten years old and very kind to her brothers.
At Saint-Pierre, I hope to become a good swimmer. All physical exercise develops strength, and I want to be strong: one day we'll have to fight for revenge, and that's why I'm going to Saint-Cyr.
The sea must be so invigorating! I feel like I'm in it, I'm making my cuts: glac glou with the right arm, glac glou with the left arm, then the plank, then the dive. I've never seen waves and the sea is often said to be blue, but it's also said to be green, and I like green better, it's less bland.
How well I swim on the living room carpet! I lie down, head up, hands glued together, and then, glac glou, glac glou. Mum and my maid are having a great time with my swimming exercises, which wear out my waistcoats nicely.
It's time to go, madam," my maid said to Mum this morning, "Robert is getting his waistcoats dirty and his stomach is bruising on this floor.
She said that, and when I arrived in the dining room where she was sewing, she quickly grabbed a towel, wiped the floor and then I, dashing about on my waves of wood, described endless glac glou.
II -- The consequences of a revolution. -- My heart sways between Batignolles and Brittany.
I'm in a terrible mood and I've left the salon so as not to show my grumpy face to my little mother any longer. But what a babe! Everything's arranged, we're leaving tomorrow, and now my Aunt Lucie thinks she's having an asthma revolution. I'd heard of star revolutions and human revolutions, but I didn't know there were asthma revolutions. To think that we're going to be stuck in Paris during the holidays! In Paris! but we'll evaporate there, it's scorching hot; no friends, no games, nothing, nothing but the boats on the Seine. The Seine is lovely, and it's fun to splash around with all sorts of people against a backdrop of woodland. I'm literally crushed under this shell. I've dreamt of Enghien, then the sea, and just as I'm about to leave, neither!
A car! It's Mum going to see my aunt Lucie in Les Batignolles. What am I going to do? What's going to become of me? If I were to cut off Griffard's ears, it would enrage my maid and perhaps lift my black mood.
No, even writing it makes me unhappy: why should this poor cat bear the brunt of my spite? I hear Mummy's voice: has she come back?
Mum had come home with Mr Benoît, her businessman, a fat man with glasses and a triple chin who doesn't much like children. I listened to a conversation that was very annoying for a poor schoolboy who had thought he was going to live in the open water and was left to fry in the sun. I arrived as Mr Benoît was raising his thick glasses to his forehead, and, as Mum had not waved goodbye, I overheard the following nasty dialogue:
Madam," said Mr Benoît, "allow me to congratulate you on this sudden change of heart; I was delighted to hear your relative tell me that the will she had made had been annulled.
- I didn't dare hope for this act of justice either. My aunt had held such a grudge against my poor husband that I imagined my son would bear the brunt of this resentment.
- You must never despair of anything," replied Mr Benoît, taking a drag.
- I can see that. At last this poor aunt asks me to forget the past, which I do with all my heart.
- No doubt, no doubt, but let the past make you cautious; believe me, beware of its influences," added Mr Benoît, sucking in the plug.
- I've postponed my departure for a few days to pay him a thank you visit.
- How! by a few days!" exclaimed the fat Mr Benoît, tapping his snuffbox. You can't imagine leaving Paris just now, madame!
- Yes, I can; there's my poor Robert," said Mama, looking at me, "to whom I promised a season by the sea.
- But not at the expense of his future, eh?" retorted Mr Benoît, raising his glasses an inch and tucking his three chins above his tie; "but not at the expense of his fortune? You wouldn't hesitate, I suppose, to deprive him of a pleasure rather than an inheritance?
- Certainly: I'm the guardian of his interests, and if I have to, I'll stay.
Mr Benoît rose to his feet and stretched out his arms.
"You must, Madame, you must. How! here is a relative who hasn't seen you for twenty years, who agrees to forget her grudges, who calls you to her side, who tells me that she will make amends to Alfred's son for the wrongs done to him, and you are going to leave Paris! If you disappear, the other heirs will come forward, her goodwill will weaken; if you leave, this business, so well begun, may be lost.
Mama looked at me and rose in her turn.
"I'm going to see my aunt and find out how things stand; if that poor aunt wants me to visit and look after her, I won't refuse her, if only because of her past kindnesses.
- If it's only a question of reconciliation," replied M. Benoît, lowering his glasses, "you understand that you must not leave Paris.
- Is his condition therefore very worrying?
- No," he said, reopening his snuffbox and saluting; "but you know, revolutions! you never know the end.
He went out, and Mama came to me.
Don't be distressed, Robert," she said, "our departure is only suspended; wait for my return before you despair.
She left with Mr Benoît and I went to join my maid who was ironing. I'm the grill.
Mama has returned; she told me that it is impossible for her to leave Paris, as my aunt Lucie has asked her to stay. I'm furious: my poor plans! such lovely plans!
Mama has just offered to send me alone to Saint-Pierre to stay with my uncle. Will I go? Will I not go?
I won't go, I don't want to leave my little mother, and now the order has been given to unpack our trunks; if Griffard gets my hands on him, I'll cut off his ears of course.
Mum has been at my Aunt Lucie's since this morning. Asthma revolutions are as long and as boring as any other, it seems. I haven't seen my little mother for two days now, and I'm really bored.
I was amazed when I heard the following dialogue. Mum in the courtyard calling my maid: "Julie, have you unpacked Robert's trunk?
- No, ma'am," replied my maid, stopping at the courtyard gate; "I started with yours, but it'll be done today.
- Don't touch it, and pack mine again quickly, we're leaving.
- Where to, madam?
- To Saint-Pierre, where I'm going to take Robert.
- Will he be happy, the poor child!
- I hope so; it costs me a lot to part with him: today we have to.
- Aren't you leaving for Saint-Pierre with us, Madame?
- Yes, Julie, but I'm stopping in Rennes, where I have to pick up an important document; then I'll come back to Paris.
- Alone, madame?
- Alone, because I'm going to live in Les Batignolles for the duration of the holidays.
- Why Batignolles, Madame? I don't understand any of this.
- Because my aunt asked me to. She only has a few weeks to live, and it would be cruel to abandon her.
- Mother," I cried, leaning out of the window, "I'll go with you to Batignolles, I don't want to go to Brittany without you.
Mama came and kissed me and said very seriously: "That's impossible, the slightest noise will do your poor aunt terrible harm; and since we have to be separated, it would be better for you to be at Saint-Pierre having fun and strengthening yourself than here being bored."
Mother said this in a tone to which I know I need not reply, and I said nothing. She's leaving with me, so long live the journey!
III -- The travellers. -- The cat Griffard and his friend Fidélio. -- I am the head of the family.
Our trunks are packed again, and I'm doing some excellent gymnastic exercises in our house, jumping over everything I meet: it's a real steeplechase.
I'd love horses and racing, but Mummy wouldn't want me to take up these pastimes too soon, because they're so dangerous," she says. Well, Mother, let's not talk about it any more, but let's swim, for example: glac glou, glac glou, glac glou.
At last we're leaving today, everything's ready; Mum and my maid are making the final preparations. As for me, I'm straddling a trunk, slinging my satchel over my shoulder and scribbling impatiently on my knees.
Men have so little to do in the way of domestic arrangements that they are always a little bored during the preparations for trips.
Half past six, another long half hour of waiting. To fill it, I'm going to describe the travellers.
1° Maman. -- I think one should always find one's mother charming; but, all filial feelings aside, mine is very pretty, very proper, tall, slim, kind: her eyes are black and stern only when she is scolding; otherwise they are gentle; she has beautiful chestnut and white hair. When I hide the white locks under the chestnut ones, my little mother looks very young. I can see that everyone respects and loves her; as for me, I'm crazy about her and I don't know how I don't fill her with satisfaction, because I love her, I love her... as I think you only love your mother.
2° Me. -- Ah, but how will I go about painting myself? Let's see! There's a big mirror there, I'll climb on the trunk. Come on, famous Robert, paint your full-length portrait: a slender, supple body, rooster-like legs, arms like strings, and, to finish it all off, a rather pretty little white ball pierced with large blue lanterns, adorned with a nose that takes on some geometrical curve and waving blond hair; a particular sign, a little wart on the left eyebrow.
I'd rather be brown, fat, tall, and have moustaches, than be frail, white and blond as I am; but I've already noticed that we always prefer what we don't have. Now that my description has been drawn up, let's get back on the back of my wooden horse and move on to :
3° My good Julie. -- My good Julie is a fat mother with a face as round and red as an apple, a nose like a snuffbox, eyes like little glow-worms, no more neck than on my hand, short and fat arms, big and heavy feet; but a face so laughing and so good that you get used to it straight away. She really hasn't stolen her maid's name, and it's thanks to her that we can see her following in her footsteps:
4° The cat Griffard. -- Griffard is a funny white cat with fine grey stripes, who at the moment passes back and forth with his tail held high between our trunks, rubbing against them with the utmost insouciance. A few months ago, on a stormy day, a tiny cat fell out of our attic window; it rolled, all wet and shivering, half dead, onto the table where my maid was ironing. She picked it up and brought it to me; we immediately wiped it dry, warmed it, pampered it and comforted it. A few hours of this good care revived him so well that, as I tried mechanically to smooth his little whiskers, he swiped me on the cheek with his paw, causing my maid to cry out: "Naughty Griffard! My poor maid was furious; she talked of nothing less than throwing Griffard into the Seine; but all of a sudden he jumped onto her lap, rubbed himself against her chest with such fine, funny little looks, looked at her and cuddled up so confidently in her arms that she put off drowning him until the next day. The next day, Griffard did not drink the green water of the Seine, but good milk poured by my maid's hand into a pretty blue saucer. If he's leaving with us for Saint-Pierre, it's my maid who wants him to. Mama hadn't counted on this strange travelling companion: it was my maid and I who decided to take Griffard with us, as our concierge agreed to take him.
"He will die of languor far from us, madame, believe it or not," said Julie.
There's nothing languid about Griffard, and whatever my maid says, I think he's just as happy to lap up the pâtée prepared by the concierge's hand as the one prepared by ours; but I love all animals in general, and I heartily begged Mum to take Griffard, since we were taking her friend Fidélio.
5° Fidélio is my dog, or rather the dog of a little sister of mine who went to heaven two years ago. During her illness she asked for a dog. She was lying in a little bed covered with dolls, sheep, dogs, cats, donkeys, toys and animals of all kinds; but all of a sudden she said: "Mummy, I don't enjoy this any more, take it all away; I'd like a live sheep, a real sheep, or a live dog. A sheep was out of the question, but Mum sent for a dog and took the first one they found. It wasn't a pedigree dog, an offspring of the canine high-life, it was a simple little black roquet, with two pretty round white spots over its eyes, and another large white spot on its back. My little sister played with this dog during her illness; when she died, Fidelio was curled up on her poor feet, which were freezing. You should have heard him yelping in despair through the house on the night of the funeral, jumping on that empty little bed and sticking his black nose under that still-warm pillow. In the days that followed, I often found my dear mother in tears and on her knees against the bed, on which Fidelio was galloping like a madman, uttering almost human complaints. So mother kept him and gave him to me, and I believe that under the skies there is no happier dog than Fidélio.
But I hear seven o'clock and the sound of a carriage.
Forward march to the Gare de l'Ouest!
Mum wanted me to personally take the seats and check in the luggage. I know that this is a job for men, and I let myself get hooked by an annoying shyness that always comes back to me just when it's time to appear or act. I was going to refuse, but my little mother looked so tired already that I mechanically took the purse and a pencil note she was handing me without saying a word. As I glanced at it, I read: two second-class places Auray, one second-class place Rennes.
"Are you in second class, Mum?" I said.
She gave me the sign that means yes, but my maid insisted.
Madame, you have to go first class with Robert," she said, "me and Griffard in third.
- You won't sleep a wink, my poor Julie," replied my good little mother.
- Nor you in second class, madame: it's hard to believe that first class carriages are gentle enough for you. Griffard might mew with that; Robert will probably just move and talk until he falls asleep. Do you want to get there sick? Then we'll come back with you, and you'll be well on your way.
The debate continued. I came up with a way of arranging everything, which was that I would be fine in the seconds with my maid and Griffard, whose meowing wouldn't keep me awake.
What a sacrifice," said Mum, "travelling apart!
I told her quietly that when I grew up we could all travel in first class.
She smiled and replied:
"In the meantime, let's travel in second class; go and get the seats.
- The ones I want?" I said.
- No, the ones on this ticket.
- Do you think I'll agree to give you neuralgia? Because if you don't sleep, you'll get neuralgia. No, and since I'm the head of the family, I'll act like the head of the family.
Mum laughed at my cranial expression, and I quickly slipped into the ranks of the ticket-takers. I felt a little embarrassed, because people were looking at me a lot, but not too much. From time to time I would turn my back to my mother, who had gone to sit on a bench among her small luggage. My maid was standing in front of her, holding Fidélio on a lead with one hand and clutching a basket in which she had nestled Griffard with the other. The worried, out-of-breath, inquisitive expression of my poor maid between her two animals would have made me burst out laughing if I hadn't been busy playing a man's role. So I was very serious on the outside, but how I laughed on the inside!
The moment came for me to approach the ticket office; I touched the peak of my cap, Mum having advised me to be polite everywhere and always, and I asked the slightly grumpy lady who was looking at me in a clear voice: "One for Rennes, two for Auray". I received my tickets, paid, and went to the office to identify our luggage, which I checked in; then I joined Mum. I then took Fidelio from my maid, who, to her great regret, was unable to conceal him in her pocket, and went to take him to the dog carriage, where he entered in spite of himself. Dealing with animals can be very annoying. No matter how loudly I shouted at Fidelio: "You'll get out of there tomorrow", he howled as pitifully as if I'd said to him: "We'll skin you tonight". His enraged barking would arouse the staff; but he didn't care about anything, he would still slip his nose between the bars after biting them to the quick. I left him, thinking what a wonderful gift intelligence is, and I went to join my mother, who was very sad to leave me, but who sacrificed herself to make the next day's separation possible. The fact is that if my little mother were ill in Rennes, I wouldn't have the courage to continue my journey. Economy is a very boring thing.
IV -- The composition of a second class carriage. -- Griffard causes a sensation. -- Cursed chatterboxes!
Here I am in the carriage with Julie and Griffard, the latter still invisible. The carriage is lit, and two corners are already taken. In the third corner there's a very fat gentleman who's already yawning like a carp, and in the fourth a short, skinny lady with a hairdo almost as high as her own, a whitish, grumpy face and so much musk that my maid and Griffard sneezed violently as they passed her. Fortunately, my maid sneezed so hard that Griffard's little sniff was lost in his loud: atchoum! But here are some new companions arriving. A young brother of the Christian doctrine, who has no more beard than I do, is inspecting the carriage; behind him I can see the face of an old brother, the most wrinkled, the most venerable of faces. "No corner," murmurs the young ignoramus. Hearing him, I ducked into my corner, my first move. I rushed to the door and said: "Brother, here's one", the second move; so the first move isn't always the right one. The young brother thanked me, the old brother made a few gestures, but they came in with their coats over their arms and their big hats in their hands. The fat man and the whitish lady started sniffing dishonestly and backing away with affectation. Then the brothers came in very quickly: a very nice and polite young man, and two misfits who had obviously forgotten the time at the buffet. Their breath mingled with the whitish lady's musk to stink up the carriage; but the train got moving, and a few good puffs of air came our way.
I was very glad to think that Mum had been left alone and comfortable in her first-class carriage. Supposing she had companions, they would never speak so loudly or so rudely as the two young men who were shouting at the top of their voices about them. I had a little chat with the good old brother, who was interested in what I told him about my studies. It's amazing how much I dislike being taken for a dunce. I won't have the foolish boast of posing for last again. Being last really is something to boast about! Robert, my friend, why are you so often last? I didn't think you were so stupid! There are always a few poor bums in the class, who, never being able, because of their lack of intelligence, to become the first, think it's nice to be at the back, and think it's great to pose for empty jugs. "We always manage", they say. Yes, you manage to get beaten by the strongest and to wear donkey ears. I'm thinking a lot this evening. It's getting dark and I can hear my two rude neighbours inviting each other to sleep in slang. Mummy thinks I like talking slang too much; but here are characters who disgust me; if I ever talk about sleeping in slang again... Come on, good evening everyone.
I was fast asleep, dreaming even, I think, when I was startled awake by a terrible scream. The whitish lady had let out this scream; all curled up in her corner, she was stretching out a sharp little finger towards my maid, who was snoring like a German spinning top. The carriage was filled with yawns and : "What? What is it? What's the matter?
- There, there," cried the lady. Oh, it's horrible! At the bottom of this woman's basket, see! see!
At the bottom of the basket of this woman, who was my maid, I saw Griffard's green eyes shining. Through his latticework he was staring at the lamp. I burst out laughing. Oh, but a laugh that woke my maid up with a start.
"Well, well, well! Griffard... Robert..." she stammered, stretching.
The basket fell to the ground, Griffard escaped from it, meowing like a demon, and leapt swiftly at the whitish lady; I saw his great zebra tail pass like a paintbrush over his irritated face. Frightened himself by the shrill cries she uttered, he leapt onto the good old brother's lap, who patted him charitably.
"I wish the train would stop," cried the lady.
The fat man and the two other young men began to hurl insults at my maid.
"That's a lot of noise for an unfortunate cat! she said, picking up Griffard. Can he hurt anyone? You see, Madame, he's as gentle as a lamb.
- There's a carriage for animals, madame," replied one of the rascals rudely.
- The poor animal couldn't have travelled without me," said my poor maid quite honestly in her simplicity.
- Well, we would have found a place for you with him, and that's where you both belonged.
I was red with anger, and was about to say something to this rude person; my two companions leaned towards me.
You disdain to answer ill-mannered people," said the young man, as he should have done; "you will not be able to compete with them in rudeness.
- Be patient, my little friend," whispered the good brother, "they'll shut up on their own.
The train stopped as he said this. The lady, her curls, her make-up, her grimaces, her musk, her frights, left, and I slipped into her corner. I could have slept if it hadn't been for the two rascals who started chattering again.
Oh, the chatterboxes! No, I'll never speak slang.
I've heard or read that the Spartans used to show a drunken man to children to put them off getting drunk; they did it very well. As far as I'm concerned, my fellow travellers have disgusted me with slang, even the kind spoken at school.
I slept well. I was sound asleep when I thought I heard "Rennes! I shook myself and got up; it was broad daylight and Mum was watching me. She had sent my maid downstairs and was trying to wake me up by running her hand over my forehead and saying "Rennes! Rennes!" into my ear. We went downstairs to the buffet. Mother gave me some broth and then gave me her final instructions. I had a heavy heart to leave her, I would have sacrificed my journey for nothing. But she wouldn't hear of it, and came to put me back in the carriage. "Write me your diary", she said. I promised her I would, and... we parted. I threw myself into a corner, desperately wanting to go back to sleep until Auray.
V -- My first impressions. -- Father Neptune's crew. -- There's the sea! -- How beautiful it is to be tanned!
I only had a nap as far as Auray, mother, and when I woke up, I was looking for you, calling for you; but you were gone. My good uncle Alphonse was waiting for us at the station; I recognised him well, even though he's a bit fatter, with a mass of white commas in his big beard that's always made me envious, and a huge forehead because his hair has fallen out. He was very affectionate, he asked me a lot about you, and he told me that I was impatiently awaited in Saint-Pierre. He laughed out loud when my maid lifted the handkerchief stretched over her basket and showed us Griffard's frightened face: he promised Griffard a place at the fire and at the table... with the animals. While my uncle was kind enough to go and claim our luggage, I ran to rescue Fidelio. I thought he was going to caress me in front of everyone; I couldn't calm him down. Animals can be very annoying, and I'm beginning to understand why parents refuse to take responsibility for the animals their children love, wherever and whenever they go.
When I left the station, I accompanied my uncle on a few errands through town. I was astonished by the silence; I had never heard so little noise. My uncle must have thought I looked funny, because he suddenly asked me: "What's the matter, Robert?
I replied: "I've got nothing, but I'm surprised, and the air smells so nice!
It's true, Mother, the air does smell, and it seems to me that it makes my lungs open inside me; it amused me to breathe hard. Besides, everything seems original to me in this country. Paris is all I know, you know, and Paris is not Auray. The streets are deserted and sometimes green with grass, the workers sing at the top of their voices, and there are children and animals everywhere. After many detours through small, zigzagging streets, on whose bumpy cobblestones you could only hear your footsteps, we crossed a beautiful boulevard, excuse me, a promenade, and we arrived at the inn where my uncle left his car. A beautiful inn, Mama, a large, low, white house, with no sign other than a large green tuft. My uncle was immediately taken over by some peasants, my maid went to ask for some food for Griffard and Fidélio, who were dying of hunger, and I was left to my own devices. I've been snooping around, not knowing what to do, and I'm getting more and more astonished. If you could only see the great kitchen of this inn, Mother! What a fireplace! A sort of awning extends from the wall into the void, covering a large stone where I can see three bright, sparkling fires blazing in company. Like the rest of the house, this kitchen is open to all comers; I enter with a poor old man, a rooster and a dog. A horse gravely crosses the driveway: will he come in? A little pig shows its snout above a doorway and growls at me: will he come in too? From time to time, a young maid takes a big green broom and chases animals and people out of the house, especially the animals, which she finds too much.
My uncle comes and goes as if he were at home in this Noah's Ark, everyone talks to him and he seems to know everyone. I'd love to become a member of parliament like my uncle when I grow up: it's great to represent your country and look after the interests of an entire department. I wonder if you can be an officer and an MP at the same time. For me, I'd choose to be an officer when I'm young and a member of parliament when I'm old, because I'll have experience and patience. But we'll see later, the first thing is to become a man, a real man.
"My horse is sick, and when my carriage is out of action, we have to use Father Neptune's horse-drawn carriage. It's hard, we'll be crammed in, overloaded; but a boy must, on occasion, disdain delicacy and camp everywhere."
I replied that this was my opinion and went to warn my maid to be ready. She was very worried about Griffard, who wouldn't let himself be caught. The two of us grabbed him, I put him back in the basket despite his resistance, and I was making a speech to my maid to get her to hurry up, when a tall man came in whose tanned face was lost in a thick collar of red and grey beard. He stared at me and brought a hand as black and calloused as a tortoise's back to the handle of the whip around his neck. Then he shook his head and walked out. I followed him and so did my maid, who said, "Is the poor man mute?
He wasn't mute, because when he met my uncle at the bottom of the stairs, he said in a thunderous voice:
"Are we setting sail, sir?
- Yes, Father Neptune," replied my uncle; "come along, Robert.
We passed into an open courtyard where there was a sort of station wagon with no footboard, no cushions, driven by a small black horse, and already full of parcels, women and children.
My uncle got in, my maid and Griffard got in, I got in, Fidélio got in, and we tried first to sit down, then to place our legs and feet. I slipped mine between an enormous black loaf of bread and a stoneware jug. Our driver watched phlegmatically as we struggled to fit in. When we were all settled in, I asked my uncle: "Where will the driver sit?
As I asked this question, the old sea dog, whom my uncle had called Father Neptune, jumped onto the stretcher and bravely sat down on the iron rail of the carriage apron. Mother, you see our Neptune, his trident, that is to say his whip, in his hand, his right foot on the right stretcher, his left foot on the left stretcher, smoking gravely without paying the slightest attention to the complaints addressed to him by the fearful travellers.
"Father Neptune, go slowly, we are loaded to sink low.
"Father Neptune, stop at the Kerbris hill, I'll walk up it."
"Father Neptune, keep up the pace on the Coz bridge.
"Father Neptune, you'll never be able to turn the mechanism from where you are.
Father Neptune stood as still as a rock, and when my uncle said, "Go," he pushed his felt over his eyes with a good thump, leaned back, turned the mechanism, and raised his whip. We left, which is to say we started dancing in the station wagon like lettuce in a basket.
I was very glad you weren't there: it would have been very unpleasant to see you shaken on that wooden bench. As for me, I danced merrily on it, trying to calm my maid who had started a fight with Griffard, who was revolted by these unpleasant shakings. He managed to get out of the basket all bristly and frightened, and began to mewl pitifully. Everyone was busy trying to calm his despair, except Neptune, who didn't even turn his head to see where these awful mews were coming from. Fidélio's little caresses finally calmed him down: they both snuggled up on my maid's lap and fell asleep.
The country we were crossing was very sad: very few trees, and soon none at all. After a very steep climb, we met a man who spoke to Neptune. Neptune replied, as always, with gestures.
Half a league further on, we stopped. Neptune came and pulled the large black loaf of bread and a very heavy sack out from under my feet; he carried them all up the steps of a stone cross that seemed to be emerging from a large gorse bush. Then he climbed back on his pole, and off he went!
But the bread and the sack?" I said to my uncle.
- They'll be taken by that man we passed," replied my uncle.
- And the thieves?
- You're talking like a little Parisian, Robert: no one will touch those things.
We walked, trotted and galloped in turn; I fell asleep for a while, I think, and then a great bump woke me up; I rubbed my eyes, because it seemed to me that heaven had fallen to earth opposite me. I let out a scream, got up and said:
"Uncle, what is this?
- What?" asked my uncle.
- There, in front of us?
My uncle laughed out loud. That, Mummy, was the sea. Oh, Mummy, how beautiful the sea is, and how I was overcome with emotion when I saw it.
We arrived at Saint-Pierre, I saw a big pile of houses, a little grey church with a grey bell tower, a big green gate and an old woman kneeling against the door, then an immense green and grey space: the shores, and further on that magnificent thing that never ends, the sea!
My aunt was waiting for us on the threshold of a large house with small balconies. She was very kind; she gave me a big kiss for you; she made me supper and told me to go to bed. I actually slept standing up; I would have liked to see my cousins, who were still playing on the beach, but as they weren't expecting us so soon, they had been given the seven o'clock pass, and my aunt demanded that I rest.
I went to bed and slept, but slept!
As you can imagine, dear Mum, my first hello was to the Ocean. From my bed I walked out onto my balcony and enjoyed watching the beautiful water turn green as I slept. How good it must feel to swim there at ease! I'm still determined to become a strong swimmer, but I feel less sure of my fearlessness. This time the bath is gigantic: in there I'll be little more than one of those microscopic infusoria that our physics teacher used to tell us about. Some day I'll tell you the names of the pretty islands that are showing up, and I think it will be easy for me to give a practical geography lesson here. Ever since the bloody war, I know that every slightly intelligent schoolboy wants to become a good geographer.
I wrote to you yesterday from my balcony, and as I was finishing the page, my maid came in with Griffard and Fidélio hot on her heels.
What are you thinking about, Robert?" she said to me. "Your cousins are up and waiting for you, and here you are in fancy dress for your first visit!
I thought you'd be annoyed if they found your Robert with his hair dishevelled and his shirt no less puffy, and I set about dressing myself. I gave myself a very thorough grooming, smeared myself with ointment, had my maid part my hair, trimmed my nails and, to be a bit flirtatious - I must admit I felt like it - I had my purple tie, your last present, dug out of the bottom of our big trunk.
I was slipping off the satin ring when there was a knock at my door. Oh la la! how my heart moved. If you'd been there, I'd have got in line behind you; but I was alone, and not proud, I assure you.
My uncle and aunt came in, then my cousins and my cousin Berthe, who's eleven and has hair like gold; Gaston, who's two years older than her, is a bit taller than me, not much; but how strong and wiry he is, and what a lovely tanned complexion he has! Mother, I want to get a tan like that, it's much more manly; I really do have a young lady's complexion, which is awful; and I'm going to swim, if swimming gives me Gaston's beautiful copper complexion.
They were all very kind, and Gaston and I became comrades straight away; the other boys, Georges and René, are still little boys: Georges is only nine and René seven.
VI -- Beasts and people. -- My fear. -- Crabs. -- I'm getting brown.
Here I am, all used to my new life, Mummy; it seems to me that I've known my cousins for a long time. Berthe is very sweet, very fearless for a little girl; she plays very well with us and has made friends with Fidélio, who follows her because she strokes him and always has cake crumbs to give him. The little girls are very affectionate towards these poor animals that we boys treat so roughly, and the animals love them very much.
This morning we paid a visit to Father Neptune, so called because he did his main campaigns on the Neptune and still has a hat bearing the name of his ship. He is now a fisherman, a commissionaire and a bather. Gaston introduced me to him: Neptune didn't speak to me, but he smiled in his big grey and tawny beard.
His grandson Piérik is Gaston's friend, he's my age; he's not as tall as me, but he looks as nimble as a cat and he's even more coppery than my cousin. He started chatting and playing with me as if he knew me.
If there were any painters around here, as Neptune calls painters, I'd like to send you a picture of Piérik and his little sister Marianna. Piérik, as I told you, is as coppery as a Bedouin; his hair is short and blond, and he wears an old blue cloth beret over his hair; his red shirt and cloth trousers are tied with a big blue lace that makes a strap; he doesn't wear shoes; he does, however, he told me, have a nice pair of shod shoes for Sundays and cloth slippers for answering mass; but most of the time he walks barefoot.
His little sister Marianna is a very good little worker; would you believe that at the age of ten she is her grandfather's housekeeper? She prepares meals, cleans the house and looks after the little pig. Piérik helps her with the hard work: he's the one who fetches the water from the mountain spring; he's the one who bathes the little pig, who's reluctant like all his peers; he's the one who places and moves the big pot and the big cauldron, which are too heavy for Marianna.
Mother, I can't believe how hard these children work. You'd be delighted to meet Marianna, she's very clean for a little Breton girl, she sweeps her house, which has a dirt floor, with a broom without a handle as high as she is, she throws the dust outside with her little hands, she peels potatoes with prodigious vivacity.
Her costume is no more complicated than Piérik's: she has a short dress of faded red cloth, a blue apron and a calico headdress; no shoes or clogs either. Do you know that the peasant women of this country, with their scarlet petticoats and blue aprons, look great in the countryside?
I'm glad that Neptune and Piérik are our close neighbours. They are such good people that Gaston has got permission to go to their house whenever he likes. My uncle isn't always able to accompany us on the shore: Neptune takes his place.
I've just told the good sailor that I want to learn to swim and he'll give me my first lesson tomorrow. I'm very happy to be at the point of learning, but I'm still a little nervous inside. It's just that we're no longer talking about wooden-bottomed baths. I confide in you, mother; don't say a word to anyone, because at last I'll get the hang of it. My uncle and Gaston compliment me on my agility and predict that I'll swim well. I hope so, I'll come to you very strong, very vigorous, very brown; I think I've already turned brown.
You must admit, my little mother, I haven't been the bravest.
I told you, I was very happy to take my first lesson, but when Neptune arrived and grabbed my hand to pull me towards the sea, I felt a strange thrill inside and I had to bite my lips to keep from screaming; I followed him trembling, my teeth chattering. When I got to the edge of the water, I took a few steps and then said to Neptune, pleadingly:
"Please start with Gaston".
He nodded and, tapping me on the shoulder, shouted in his stentorian voice:
"Gaston!"
Gaston came running and I bolted for the rocks. I kept going and going, no matter how many times I heard myself calling, I didn't turn away. I started chasing crabs and caught lots of them.
I didn't come back until the sea had receded far enough for me not to be afraid of a second swim. I was very ashamed, mother, and yet I tried to put on a brave face.
My aunt said to me, "Why didn't you want to take your lesson, Robert?
- Robert has a passion for crabs, Mum," cried Gaston; "when he sees one moving, he'll follow it to the end of the world.
- That'll be tomorrow," my aunt continued.
I coughed and added: "It'll be tomorrow.
As you can see, I got through my adventure quite well. As Neptune never talks, people will always think that I ran away chasing crabs. Basically, I'm quite happy for people to believe that, but the truth is that I was scared to death.
Henri IV, who was such a brave man, is said to have been unable to avoid shivering on the battlefield, which didn't stop him from throwing himself into the thick of the fray once the shiver had passed. I will do as Henry IV did, and when Father Neptune stands for re-election tomorrow, I hope to follow him, trembling or not.
My cowardice has made me sad; I did, however, catch a good catch of crabs, for which I received many compliments.
Crabs are the first beasts of the sea with which I form intimate relationships. It amuses me greatly to see them walking sideways towards the puddles. Catching them is easy.
When they don't come dazedly to us on their own, we go and lift the fringes of wrack that cover the puddles; the crab is lurking underneath, we pick it up delicately between thumb and forefinger, and no matter how much it wriggles, we throw it into the fishing basket. The big ones are armed with quite formidable defensive pliers: so today I witnessed the following little scene:
A poor woman was digging up seaweed on the shore where we were frolicking; a very small boy was dragging himself around her. As she was picking the seaweed, she grabbed a crab and called to the child, showing it to him from a distance; he came running, and the mother, while asking me if I had taken anything, broke off the crab's two big legs and gave it unarmed to the child, who began to play with the poor mutilated thing. I walked away, finding the operation rushed and very cruel. Besides, the crab plays a very important role on these shores: it's food and play, it's the chafer of the children of the sea.
At the moment, I can see Piérik putting four of them in a Daumont-style hitch, and another child twirling his own, which has a string attached to its leg; they fish for it, cook it, eat it, have fun with it and use it as fertiliser. For me, I like to chase them, to see their little round eyes, their brown carapace and their long legs shine under the damp leaves of the seaweed.
Shrimps are also the object of another, more amusing hunt. In the puddles, all you have to do is find the crab: as soon as you see it, you're caught; the shrimp, on the other hand, flees quickly, and competes for its freedom.
Have you ever seen a live shrimp, Mother? They look like transparent, colourless grasshoppers. I, who only knew it in scarlet, hardly wanted to believe that this pretty little crystal animal with long whiskers was the same as the one I had eaten. This evening, when my aunt allowed us to cook our victims ourselves, the experiment convinced me. The colourless, transparent little beast became solid and scarlet in the boiling water.
Everything here interests and amuses me. If only I knew how to swim! Here, Mother, I'd like to see you tomorrow.
I swam, mother, I'm cured of my fear. -- I was really more determined than proud this morning, as I walked towards the beautiful sandy beach where we have our frolics. A little shiver ran down my spine when I saw Neptune appear, his scapular across his bare chest.
Wait, little brother," he said, "Piérik is coming.
Good Neptune had thought that Piérik's presence would have encouraged me. Piérik arrived bare-headed, bare-bodied like his grandfather and wearing his scapular like him.
"Play around here like little porpoises, waiting for the tide to come in," said Neptune, stamping his foot on the sea.
Gaston, Piérik, the kids and I started splashing about in the first waves: it was great fun and my shivers were going down.
Suddenly Neptune grabbed me by the waist and plunged me into a big wave. I didn't scream, Mother, but I had the most incredible cramps! I was blowing like a seal. When I came to, I let him do it again. Suspended from Neptune's iron arm, I imitated the swimming movements that Gaston and Piérik were executing in front of me. I succeeded straight away. Surrounded by my three good swimmers, with one hand on Neptune's bronze shoulder, I was bold and more than once I drank from this water that was as bad as it was beautiful.
"You'll swim well, my little brother", said Neptune as he carried me back to shore on his back.
Four hours later, I took a second lesson, and I've just about got over the shivers.
Gaston is very obliging, he stays with me and gives me advice.
You're very happy, mother; I follow the doctor's orders faithfully, so after our holidays you won't have to worry about your Robert's health any more, he leads the most hygienic life in the world. I get up early, go to bed early, sleep like a log and eat like an ogre. The sea makes you hungry like a dog. I'm at my best with the sun, the wind and the sea breeze, and in eight days I'll be able to add, with the Ocean. I'm still a bit white with Piérik and even Gaston, but patience, that will pass. This evening I looked at myself in a puddle, and I assure you I've turned brown.
VII -- The beasts again! -- Ricoco. -- The valiant Krack. -- The mouse hunter. -- Our sand fortifications. -- Our bastion.
My diary was necessarily suspended for two days, my dear mother; we have run so much by land and sea! It's Neptune who always drives us: he drives the horse-drawn cart that he rents by the year as a commissionaire; he drives the boat that my uncle borrows from the customs, or his old fishing boat.
We like Piérik and Neptune more and more, and we visit each other all the more often as their hut is next to our house, as I told you.
From my balcony I can see Neptune smoking his pipe at his fireplace where a seaweed fire is burning; a hut is next to his, and when I write to you I can usually hear the voice of the fisherwoman saying a mass of tender words to her tiny child. Added to this voice are the squeals of a little pig whose stable is next to Neptune's house, and from time to time a squeal from Ricoco.
Ricoco is an old parrot that Father Neptune brought back from his travels thirty years ago. He's not big, but he's very pretty; his body is greenish-purple, his head is whitish, his tail is light green; he has purple feathers on top of his wings that form bright shoulder pads, and a fan of blue and red feathers at the tip.
Berthe is very fond of him and feeds him very gently. I like to see him walk gracefully on an old mast stretched across Father Neptune's little garden, but I don't look after him in any other way.
What I like is Krack. Mother, this is Krack. How vigorous, patient and wise he is! This horse - it's a horse - amazes me, and I'd like to have his docility. Once harnessed to the little wagon, he does Neptune's bidding and obeys just by frowning. You know that Father Neptune is the town's commission agent, by land and by sea. He goes to town, comes back laden with a thousand parcels, and makes a processional tour of the town in his carriage. Father Neptune takes the bags, carries them, and Krack, left alone, doesn't move a step, doesn't turn his head.
He's not an old horse though, he's a pretty black pony, a bit gaunt under his little saddle embroidered with copper nails, but very strong and very brave.
We rode him up and down the coast, and my maid never tired of saying, "What a horse!
"What a horse! There are no animals so submissive.
Poor Julie admires Krack all the more because she has so much to do with Fidélio and Griffard. The sea frightens Fidélio, he has never agreed to let himself be bathed, but it seems that the sea wind intoxicates him; he runs, he gambols, he barks, he pulls Julie by her petticoat with an enraged air that makes us giggle. As for Griffard, he is frighteningly independent. So sleepy, so reserved, so stuffy in Paris, he leads a life in Saint-Pierre that is quite debauched for a cat in good company. He slips into Julie's hands and goes off to look for mice in attics and even on roofs; he frequents all the skinny cats that pass by, looking hungry and marauding, which greatly shocks my maid, who doesn't understand his taste for these badly combed animals.
She's beginning to regret not leaving him with our concierge, who would have pampered him so peacefully on his old green armchair.
"That cat will never go back to being what it was," my maid says with a sigh.
Gaston and I laugh a lot at all these little scenes; Georges, René and Berthe take things more seriously and play tricks on that naughty Griffard to keep him in the house. They love him very much, and above all they love Julie, who is the epitome of complacency, who tells them stories, who seriously cares for their smallest aches and pains, and who remains forever, without complaint, in the place where they are having fun. These children are very intrepid; but you understand that they can't always keep up with us: they are not allowed to go beyond the first strike, which is already quite far for their little legs.
It's on this large sandy beach that my uncle pitches his tent, and every day we go there after breakfast. As it had a Breton name that was very hard to pronounce, we christened it the Grève des Digues. We're building dykes there and we've even started a whole series of military works under my uncle's direction. He's the engineer, we're the builders and the kids are our helpers.
We dug in the sand with small wooden shovels and, more often than not, with our hands and feet; we made trenches, glacis, forts; we built skilful fortifications against the waves, but they were as flimsy as anything built with sand. It's impossible to fight the sea. The work is superb, right up until the moment when the waves slowly arrive and treacherously creep up on us. The bottom of our ditches became soaked at first, and the change in colour of the sand warned us that the enemy was working underground; soon a small wave caused a section of the advanced work to crumble, and we rushed to the threatened spot, throwing sand at it with all our hands; my uncle and Berthe got involved, but it was useless! A flood passed by, the walls crumbled, the sea victoriously overcame our fortifications, beat its way through, and retreated, levelling everything on the shore.
Today, Piérick spent the morning with us and we tried to build a real bastion, not of sand but of stone. It was a big undertaking: we had to go and find pebbles, stones and fragments of rock with great difficulty.
First of all, we dug the circumvallation lines in the sand as usual, but on a larger scale; it took us two hours of work; Gaston, Piérik, Georges, René, Berthe and even Julie worked hard.
Once the lines had been dug out, we had to build our bastion behind them; my uncle let us do everything, to make sure we had benefited from his practical castration course.
Gaston and I drew up the plans, then we built a sledge out of planks, and the kids all harnessed up to it. They went up against the rocks on the cliff; Piérik loaded the sledge with stones and sat on a stretcher horse; René went in front of him, Georges went in front of René, and Berthe pulled at the front; Gaston and I built with the materials they brought us.
We built our bastion very nicely: we used the wet sand as lime, and my uncle himself gave us hope that our little dike wouldn't be destroyed that day.
Will we withstand the first wave? That's the question. I can assure you that we're very impatient and we can't wait to be there. Gaston and I are full of hope, and the little ones, who have gone to so much trouble, have no doubt that this beautiful dyke will hold until the end of the world! I'm asking it to hold out for one tide, just one tide. Father Neptune, whom we consulted, smiled into his beard, and we couldn't get anything else out of him.
I can hear Berthe coming up the stairs very quickly; she's probably coming to get me. I'll tell you this evening whether our fortifications have held out; I'll send you a victory bulletin or I'll record our defeat.
VIII -- What happens to what you build on sand. -- The poor independents. -- Landscapes and essays.
Mother, I am not a man to publish false dispatches, so I courageously mention our defeat.
The sea is a brute that has invaded and overturned everything. First we ran, as I told you, to our defence works, we placed our workers in the trenches and we waited for the sea. It came gently as usual; but the waves were stronger than yesterday, and wider, because they rolled in. Our advanced works suffered the usual fate, the ditches became wet, filled with foam and water, and the piles collapsed. Finally, the waves came and beat against the foot of the bastion; the stones became smooth and shiny, but held firm. Little by little, however, I saw the sand that had been cementing them melting away; it was in vain that I had new sand placed in the gaps, as the water came in, slipped between the stones and dissolved it; we had to retreat before the sea, which, being very rough, exceeded the limits we had set for it. However, our wall appeared above the waves and remained gloriously standing. Suddenly Berthe burst into tears: a big wave had come up and everything had suddenly collapsed.
We took the desolate Berthe, who was crying her eyes out, towards the tent; Georges and René were showing their little fists to the sea, which was following at our heels; Gaston and I were not proud.
Father Neptune arrived; we took our lesson, swam, looked for shells, and, with the sea gone, we ran towards the place where our work had been done: only two large stones remained as a monument to our perseverance; the others had been swept out to sea or buried in the sand. Gaston and I sat on this debris like Marius on the ruins of Carthage. Poor Marius! I had never felt so sorry for him, never!
I was a little bored with our failure, dear Mama, and Gaston and I agreed to abandon the sand forts. Georges, René and Berthe, who were more persevering than we were, continued to build them; we left them to it and we emigrated with Piérik to the great Strike of the Cross, so named because a natural cross rises above a pile of rocks. This beach is magnificent, but a little remote.
You know the shores of the ocean, mother; nothing is more rugged; the gnawing waves have cut deep and bizarrely into the rocks and especially the cliffs; the coast we live on is literally scalloped by the waves: the jagged edge of the scallop forms the cape or the promontory, the bottom of the cut forms a bay or a cove, depending on the size.
Our house is situated in front of a wide beach at the end of a small bay; the sea in its flow beats against the garden wall and shimmers almost down to our balconies; but the ebb leaves the beach uncovered, and we can only see the sea beyond wide green and brown areas criss-crossed by currents that trace zigzags across it. These green and brown areas are simply heaped-up mud, and no one other than the fisherwomen, wearing skates consisting of a plank with a hoof nailed to it, ventures onto the muddy spaces.
To get to our bathroom, we walk along the first festoon and arrive on the Digues beach, and if we want to go from the Digues beach to the Croix beach, we have to go around a second, very wide festoon, i.e. go half a league.
Once there, all we can see is the Atlantic Ocean; and at low tide we have on our right an immense space, a sort of rocky steppe, covered with a sheet of wrack.
From a distance, these grey and yellowish rocks appear flat, but up close they have peaks, teeth, crevices and asperities, and despite the carpet of wrack that covers them, you need sea legs to venture out. Every angle, every stone has its own tuft, its own plume, its own garland, and the isolated rocks are enveloped in a network of green pearls: without a sentence I would say a kind of frozen goo.
On these rocks live the limpets that the fishermen call barnacles. The beast, a strange snail with thin white horns, huddled under its small grey striped cone, sticks to the stone and you need a good knife to get it off. Every fisherwoman can make her own soup or fatten up her little pig. Berthe turns limpet shells into hats for her doll.
So many things in the sea, dear Mummy! So many shells of all colours and shapes, and in each shell a little animal that can become food for man! I am amazed by what I see, and I am very curious about all the details that my uncle gives me about everything.
The people here are poor, if you like, but the sea provides them with the satisfaction of their most pressing needs. It feeds them, it heats them, it gives them medicine: it is their butcher, their coal-maker, their pharmacist. Isn't that independence?
These beggars don't beg, they fetch what God has put into the sea for them, and they have no one to thank but him. They have worked, they have conquered; I find in these poor people a peaceful and almost noble physiognomy: they are not miserable people with an envious face and an outstretched hand: they are poor people. Mother, there's a big difference between those words, and I'll ask you to explain it to me later.
Gaston, who doesn't know the poor in the big cities, thinks that I'm surprised by very little and that I'm very enthusiastic; but he's delighted that I love his country and that I'm not complacent.
"If Mum and Dad had listened to me, they wouldn't have asked you to come!
I think that's called prejudice, Mother: I've sometimes reasoned that way about people, or rather unreasoned. What's true is that we're delighted to know each other, that we have great fun together, making little concessions to each other, and that we love each other like two brothers.
Tomorrow we're going to La Croix beach; we're going to cut seaweed, we're going to work the meadows by the ocean, and Piérik is starting to stock up on heating for the winter.
Really, Mother, I'm no longer surprised by the silent habits of Father Neptune and Piérik: all workers are silent. I'm beginning to realise that lazy and talkative are synonymous. Today I have few useless words on my conscience, but my loins and arms are very tired. So this morning we set off at dawn for the seaweed harvest. Once again, what a thing this seaweed is, Mother! First of all, it's charming in all its forms: in smooth, shiny silk ribbons, in plumes, in fringes, in bells, in cords; but how useful it is! Dried on the cliffs, it can be used as wood and charcoal, as litter for animals and fertiliser for the land; my uncle told me that iodine and soda are extracted from it, and it's there all ready to use: all you have to do is pick it. Wealthy people arrive on the shore with carts pulled by horses like Krack's, or by small oxen.
Usually there is one horse and two or four oxen; the drivers go out into the sea and are not afraid to drive their carts in; the horse is up to its chest in water; the cart is filled with seaweed and they slowly make their way back to the shore. What a load, mother, these wet bunches dripping with seawater! It's a short journey, but what a push these unfortunate beasts have to make to pull this heavy cart from the soft ground! They stop, their legs bend: a little more and they'd be lying down in discouragement; but then all the fishermen surround them: men, women and children start a veritable hullabaloo and hurl vehement apostrophes at them; they are shouted at, deafened, pushed and prodded with pitchforks. The poor beasts, bewildered, had only one instinct left, that of escaping as quickly as possible from these savage cries, these multiple stings; they pulled, they took vigorous impulses and they left the abyss of sand. The howling stopped, the cart rolled along the solid path and the howlers went to surround another crew.
On the rocks, things are less noisy; the poor women and their children tear off the seaweed with their hands and carry it in bundles on their heads or shoulders. It's hard, it's heavy, and we helped Piérik a lot, dear Mum.
As Father Neptune divides his time between running errands with Krack and fishing on the Brillante, it's up to Piérik alone to stock up on heating. Next year, Marianna will help him; but she is still too small, too weak, to be of much use to him.
I've helped this brave little Piérik with all my heart, Mother, but I must confess that I'm exhausted. I'm not complaining, it would be very foolish of me to complain, and I assure you that I'm going to change my tune on many points. Living with real workers makes you think, and I'm definitely breaking with softness. I confess, I'd rather be fishing than doing Greek themes; but in the end it's my job to be intelligent, to do themes, and I have my holidays to indulge in gymnastic exercises. Piérik, on the other hand, is always working, always tiring himself out, with no holiday, no let-up: rain, thunder or shine, he's always working. Mother, I admire Piérik and I want to become a worker like him, in my own way.
What do you think of the perfume my last letter brought you, dear mother? At the bottom of the envelope, did you find those charming little pink carnations, so delicately shaded, so finely serrated? It's one of my discoveries.
Yesterday the sea was nasty and cold; Neptune and Piérik couldn't look after us, and the nets we'd been ordered to catch prawns hadn't arrived: we had the idea of trying an excursion to the coast, and they let us. With our bags slung over our shoulders, our shoes shod and our mountain stick in hand, we set off to explore our coastline.
At the same time as we were cutting seaweed, we were cutting wheat and millet and threshing. So there was a lot of activity on the farms. We were made very welcome, and Fidélio, whom we had brought along, feasted on milk. He stuck his snout into every bowl on the floor.
Along the way we came across some beautiful fields and large sand dunes that were almost knee-deep.
Coming out of one of these dunes, we came across a large wasteland, carpeted with grass and dotted with pink carnations. There are flowers everywhere, even on the rocks, and I wasn't paying much attention to them when, tripping over a stone, I poked my head into a clump.
Mother, how lovely those flowers smelt in the sunshine and hot sand! How charming!
Gaston and I harvested so many that when we reappeared on the pier we looked like herbalists on tour.
It's fair to say that we perfumed the house with our bouquets, and Berthe put them everywhere.
Berthe is a very good little housewife, she's always looking after other people, and she arranges everything like you do, Mother.
No one drapes the folds of a curtain better, arranges bouquets better or fights dust more fiercely.
My uncle gave her a lovely red feather duster as a present, and she's very skilful at removing the dust that comes our way every minute from the path and the beach.
It was she who gave me the idea of perfuming my letter with carnation.
While I was writing, she came in with her feather duster and a basket and put a big clump of carnations on my balcony, not in my room: "Because," she said, "a thoughtless person like you wouldn't take the precaution of removing them at night, which is what you should do.
As I was folding my letter, she added: "Would you like some for your mum?" and presented me with three of them. I slipped them into the envelope and flattened them with a good punch - I had to - and they went to tell you about your son.
IX -- The philosopher of puddles. -- Fidélio is heroic. -- I'm going into descriptions.
Today I'm going to tell you that they've christened your Robert the Puddle Philosopher.
I love puddles, not like Gaston, who, as a future naval officer, is always sailing, but as an amateur. I like to sit on a high stone in the middle of a beautiful puddle of sea water, and I spend hours examining the little maritime people who inhabit it. I like to watch the hermit crabs gallop under the clear water, their homes on their backs, to see the shrimps glisten, to see the green crabs appear. Sometimes I disturb the water with the tip of my foot, and straight away the little emigrants return to their shells, the prawns leap up in fright, the crabs sink cautiously under the seaweed.
Gustave, who draws very well, has amused himself by drawing me perched on a rocky ridge. My arms are around my knees and my chin is tucked into my waistcoat. He wrote underneath this caricature, which is very well done: Le philosophe des flaques (The philosopher of puddles). The name stuck, and since yesterday I've been called Monsieur le philosophe, illustrious philosopher, sublime philosopher. Berthe herself calls me that, but after asking me confidentially if it didn't hurt.
Gaston not only drew caricatures, he also drew, from life, the coastline, the rocks, the cliffs, the sea, the boats, the fishermen and fisherwomen crossing the shores, their harpoons or nets slung over their shoulders. The women, in their scarlet dresses and white capes, are quite picturesque.
I wanted to draw too, but I made scabs; my boats are frozen on a sea of cardboard, nor do my men move on my shores. I've been thinking about this. Mother, I've done too little work, I'm sorry, and next year I'm going to try to make up for lost time! I want to catch up with Gaston in drawing; I've got the aptitude, I'll work. If you see my teacher, tell him in advance, if only to honour my commitment.
My maid comes to me with a pen in her hand for the twentieth time: she wants me to recount, without further delay, the deeds of Fidélio, and your philosopher writes to you from his balcony.
Earlier, after philosophising for a long time about my puddles, I had joined Gaston, who was mooring a toy boat on which he was making a whole study of the sails. We heard Neptune hail us; he and Krack had done their errands, and the good father had come to offer us a bath. Neptune was having fun getting Georges and René to swim in the first wave, and my maid arrived with Fidélio and some provisions.
Let's bathe Fidélio," said Gaston, "he seems to be doing well.
We called him over and pushed him towards the children he loves, but as always he made a scene: no sooner had his paw touched the water than he twisted and escaped us. I was able to roll him by force into the water, but as soon as he got wet he slipped through my hands like an eel, leapt over my shoulder and went wallowing in the sand. Never has a dog had such a horror of water. While he was shaking himself off, Gaston took his diving lesson. Neptune thought we were strong enough swimmers to learn to dive. Fidélio had come to sit next to me on the sand, but out of my reach. When it was my turn and he saw me enter the water, he looked worried and approached the shore. I walked over to Neptune; the water was cold.
"Come on, inside, or we'll catch cold", said Neptune, taking me by the arm.
A desolate bark made us turn our heads: Fidélio, his fur bristling, was at the very edge of the wave, howling miserably as he looked at us. Neptune made me dive: more furious barking; the poor dog seemed to be beside himself and was really wailing; on the third dive he jumped up on the rocks and went to the very tip!
"Let's see what he does," said Neptune, and he grabbed me between his nervous arms as if to throw me into the waves from afar.
Mother, that poor dog who trembles with all his limbs at the sight of the sea, who mercilessly bites those who want to plunge him into it, threw himself into the water and swam towards us barking. Neptune had set foot on a rock just above the water's edge, Fidelio boarded and lunged at me to lick me passionately, and at him to bite him. Neptune shook himself and tried to get rid of Fidélio, who had his teeth in the fabric of his trousers; finally I swam out, the dog followed me, we returned to the shore from where we were watching this little scene, and I thought the poor animal would eat me up with caresses. Everyone was moved: my maid came running with a piece of buttered bread, Berthe with a sponge with which she tenderly wiped the faithful dog's wet fur. We had to give up the lesson: Fidélio was keeping me in sight, as it were, and he only regained his composure when he saw me dressed from head to toe.
As for my maid, she is completely enthralled, and her heart, which had been wavering between Griffard and Fidélio, has decided in favour of the latter. She consoles herself for Griffard's increasingly frequent infidelities by showering Fidélio with caresses and tokens of honour. It is to please her that I am recording this evening the feat of your good dog, whom I love doubly since I have seen the energy of his devotion.
The sun has not set in its usual way. Usually it's a magnificent globe of fire that stands out clearly against a clear, even sky and casts rays that set the sea ablaze; it's sublime, and it seems simple; this evening great bands of red and lilac streaked the sky at sunset and half-veiled the sun, which was blood-red; the sea was dark and dull; I sensed that the weather was going to change.
This morning everything in the sky was still hazy, the sea hadn't regained its transparency, and Neptune, who saw me examining the outside from my balcony, called out to me: "The storm is coming, my little brother".
I was still hoping that the sky would clear and that the sea would become clearer. My uncle, on the signs of the weather, decided that we wouldn't go out. Gaston and I prayed that they would at least let us go as far as the Strike of the Dykes: we assured them that the sky was beginning to clear.
We set off and were caught in a terrible downpour. What a squall, Mother! We huddled under one of those huge Celtic stones they call dolmens; but little torrents chased us away from that shelter: not a shelter, not a tree, not a rock, not a cave; we got the full downpour, we arrived dripping from head to toe.
My aunt wanted to put us to bed, but my uncle objected and just locked us in the house. Gaston ended up in the dining room, where the children play, and I come to distract myself near you.
You've often asked me to describe the village, the church and my room, and I'm hastening to take advantage of my time of seclusion to give you this pleasure.
Very disrespectfully, I'll start with my bedroom, because that's where I am, and if the sun came up, the bird might be allowed to fly out of its cage. My room - let's see how well I can look at it! is narrow and long; the furniture: a bed, a table, two chairs, a mirror that makes me look green; for decoration a religious engraving, two Chinese fans, a stuffed curlew, a lacquer box; two superb paintings by the good Lord. To make it easier for you to admire them, I'm opening both my windows at the same time, which makes all my papers fly.
The picture on the left is in the style of Léopold Robert: a few gardens with large fig trees, and on a hill a beautiful farm, pyramids of sheaves, farming implements, peasants coming and going and so clearly outlined against the sky that none of their movements escape me.
On the right: an immense horizon, steeples, a few lines of trees, sand dunes, the blue sea bordering everything superbly. At the moment, the shore is bare and the white gulls are having an excellent meal in the green vases, whose monotony is broken by a great zigzag of azure, swelling by the minute. The sea is coming in; soon I'll be able to look out over it from my balcony, and the old sandy brig with its two bare masts and white trim will be afloat. In the meantime, it is quite dry, and the water that gushes in a pretty cascade from its rotten sides has itself dried up. A group of children hang from its rusty anchor, while others swing from the ropes attached to the mast.
As a counterpart to the old ship in the landscape, you can put the two little dwellings I told you about: one is the hut of Neptune and his grandchildren. A garland of drying fish adorns the door outside; inside it's nothing but twisted nets and other fishing gear. All the family's clothes hang from a small mast rolled up in its sail.
From the other hut comes the voice of the woman who is always saying a million nice things to her baby, and the grunts of a little pig whose snout I can see creeping between the joints of the bad door, which he shakes all day with nameless stubbornness.
Let's go from my room to the village. The village is a hodgepodge of randomly oriented houses, surrounding an old church without order like independent chicks surround their mother, each turned, perched as it wishes, but not moving away. The cemetery wall is the only barrier between the church and the sea, and the square touches the shore. The customs office, a modest little house, is on this square. None of the dwellings stand out from the others; the presbytery is in the shadow of the bell tower, and the town hall ends a sort of alleyway made up of small houses and shacks. This alleyway, which runs along the shore, is, by virtue of its position, the boulevard of the Italians of Saint-Pierre.
If I were an archaeologist, I'd tell you all sorts of learned things about the church; but, alas! I can barely distinguish the Romanesque style from any other style of architecture, and I'm no more fluent in reading the hieroglyphs traced on the Druidic monuments than those on the obelisk of Louqsor, on the Place de la Concorde. The church is an excellent place to pray, that's all I know. When I'm there, and I hear the waves singing, and I think I'm standing before the creator of this ocean, I start praying as you so love to see me praying in the church of Notre-Dame des Victoires. Incidentally, our church has some bizarrely sculpted capitals that look as old as the hills, and at the back of the choir there's a rustic fresco that I love because it's so simple. The Virgin Mary looks like a common fisherwoman: she has a tanned complexion and is dressed in red and blue; but she looks good, and the baby Jesus has a very graceful face under his thick blond wig. This painter, who was only a dabbler, had some Christian and maternal feeling," said my uncle Alphonse.
X -- An enigma. -- Griffard's misconduct. -- Work projects. -- The merchant. -- The first geography lesson.
The day before yesterday my uncle visited the church as an archaeologist; he told us that it dated from the thirteenth century, that the capitals were Romanesque and covered with ovals and flowers, then he asked us two riddles: he told Gaston and me, who accompanied him, that there were two sublime things in this church, one for feeling, the other for thought. Have we looked? Did we search with our eyes? Finally, I stopped in the middle of the nave. Against the pillar on the right, there was a large statue of the Blessed Virgin crowned with gold stars, leaning slightly forward and carrying on her left arm the divine Child, who also seemed to be rushing forward to walk. I read on the pedestal: Notre-Dame de bon voyage . Against the left-hand pillar, there was a second, smaller statue of the Blessed Virgin holding the Child lying in her arms; I read on the pedestal: Notre-Dame de consolation . From the ceiling of the church hung a large ship decorated with flags. My uncle was following my study and I saw him smile. I pointed to the ship; "the sailor is leaving", I said to him softly, "his wife and children are praying to Our Lady for a safe journey; he is perishing, they are coming to Our Lady of Consolation".
Mother, I had guessed, that was it; my uncle told me, the sailor's life is but a voyage, and, his life being perilous, his family needs both Our Lady of a Safe Voyage and Our Lady of Consolation.
Gaston, boosted by my success, declared that he wanted to guess the other problem; he searched for a long time, and finally I saw him walking from one altar to the other, and raising his finger he said to his father: That. I confess that I didn't understand; my uncle showed me, in the centre of the little altars, one of which is surmounted by a saint in a shepherd's hat and short trousers, two hideous golden busts, which claim to represent God the Father and God the Son.
These two vulgar, shapeless figures meant nothing to me, and yet my uncle kept saying: Yes, the sublime is that. Gaston had to say to me: Read. I read on the left banner: Ego sum alpha et omega; on the right banner: Ego sum via, veritas et vita.
I understood: God was in this poor temple and he was calling himself by these names and expressions that reveal his omnipotence.
But I'm really writing to you like a beardless academic, I'm getting ahead of myself; it's my impromptu bath that's probably exasperating me.
After a shower like that, your blood burns and you feel full of energy.
Berthe opens the door and says to me softly: "Come downstairs, Robert, it's stopped raining, and Mum and I are going to ask Dad to come and take a walk with us on the beach.
My maid and Berthe cried out, Griffard had just strangled a large water rat in front of us. Such a well-behaved cat," said my maid, "who wouldn't have bothered with all the mice in the world, to have become so greedy and such a monster!
- Such a nice cat," said Berthe, "who has such a velvet paw!
Outraged by his behaviour, they declared that they would no longer look after him. So now he's on his own and I don't know whether you'll see him again: I'm very much afraid that his holiday will turn into a permanent leave of absence. The fact is that the life he is leading suits his cat instincts better than the sham life we arranged for him in Paris. If you had seen his green eyes shine when he was watching that unfortunate rat, if you had seen him pounce, if you had seen his tiger-like physiognomy when he seized it in his jaws. How quickly one falls back into one's natural state! I know that the bad company he's been in has done a lot to get him out of his honest life: he immediately made friends with the scoundrels of cats who roam the beaches; those little brats have demoralised him, and he wanders madly with them all day long.
Now he's hunting rats and, despite all our efforts, he strangles one in front of us: he's a bohemian, there's no denying it, and one fine day he'll present himself without ears to our frightened eyes. From that day on my maid assures me that he will become a stranger to her.
The comical seriousness with which she talks about Griffard makes us laugh out loud. Gaston and I wanted nothing less than to cut off the cat's ears to witness the solemn scene of the curse; but Berthe so urged us not to do so, that we left it to circumstances.
This morning my uncle looked serious, and when he saw us enter the tent, he beckoned us to sit down. "Do you know, my children, that you haven't worked for three whole weeks," he said.
Oh, Mother, what a face I made! You know, the face you know so well. Through the open door of the tent I could see the sea: it seemed to me that it had gone from being blue to being black as ink; the large pebbles looked like my dreadful Latin dictionaries; the wind was throwing Greek words at me. Gaston, I must confess, looked no better than I did; my aunt and Berthe burst out laughing.
"My aunt and Berthe burst out laughing. "Well, this calculation displeases you, you lazy fools!
Gaston and I both shuddered: it felt like ten crabs were crawling up our backs.
"Did you ever think you'd be living like this for two months?
And with touching agreement we replied: "We hoped so.
- This is unreasonable," said my aunt; "a little reason, my children.
- At least a whole month, Mum," said Gaston.
My aunt looked at my uncle, and Berthe went to hug him.
"Go for a month," he replied.
We thanked him with such enthusiasm! The sea was blue again, the pebbles were pebbles again and the wind was singing merrily: "Eight days, eight days, eight days".
"The vicar of our parish agreed to give you an hour of Latin a day, and I didn't want to ask any more of his kindness. I didn't want to ask for any more than that. To this first duty I'll add a free course in history, geography and natural history.
- With which teacher?" asked Gaston.
My uncle gestured to himself, and when he saw us smiling with contentment:
Geography," he said, "we'll talk about by walking the cliffs and dunes, and they'll make me maps of the country, which is excellent, because what's a draughtsman who can't draw from nature? Natural history will necessarily be based on the productions of the sea. Is that how it's going to be?
Judge if it suited us, Mum! studying with a stick in our hand and my good uncle as our guide! You'll see that I'll come back almost a scholar: you always retain what you understand, and my uncle is very clear in his explanations. I'll tell you that I know my way around perfectly now, and that I'm not too bad at drawing the contours of a bay; so long live the free education course on the Strike of the Dykes! and long live my good uncle!
She's ten years old, dressed in a little purple dress with a velvet bodice and sleeves, a blue apron and a little muslin headdress; she has the prettiest shells and the most beautiful sea grasses in the Gulf on her stand, and she offers us all this with the most engaging air in the world.
This merchant is Berthe, who has had the whim to dress up like a peasant woman from Saint-Pierre, and who imagines selling us our shellfish and seaweed to buy Marianna some shoes. I bought two cents' worth of a very pretty periwinkle, all black and white tiles, and twenty cents' worth of a garland of fine seaweed, which I'm giving you as a present. Don't laugh at my present, Mother, it's very pretty. The foliage of the headdress is fine and bushy; black sheaths containing more than forty small, well aligned seeds mingle with the foliage; the whole thing is attached to a thin stem of black leather, and it makes the most charming garland.
Berthe, who was a little embarrassed by her headdress this evening, got rid of it, and we wrapped this seaweed around her head; it made such a pretty effect in her blonde hair that my aunt, who paints very well in pastels, said she would do her portrait that way. My cousin put aside one garland, and I bought the other. But I told her I'd only bargain with her for laughs. She promised to lower her prices.
You understand that these purchases would be ruinous for me, because I'm not like Gaston, who haggles, buys and never pays. I paid for my purchases on the spot; but today I have twenty-two pennies less in my purse. It's the pocket money you gave me: Berthe's very nice and Marianna will have shoes.
I came out of the history and geography class, that is to say the tent set up not on the shore, but on the high point of the cliff from where you could see all the surrounding area. The teacher had a pedestal table in front of him, on which were placed maps, a large book and excellent binoculars. Behind him, my aunt was tapestry weaving; Berthe, in her local costume, was sorting seaweed; Georges, who is very quiet, was making stick figures on his knees, and the two pupils, Gaston and I, were placed on folding chairs opposite my uncle; a large book served as our desk, and we had pencils in our hands. René, my maid and Fidélio were playing outside.
My uncle began by giving us a general outline of the history of the country we were in and its geographical situation. I confess to you, mother, that I didn't think I was on such illustrious ground; everything he said interested me deeply, I took a lot of notes and I hope to write a careful essay. I'll keep these strike papers and we'll read them together on winter evenings: you'll see how interesting these studies are; for the moment I'm leaving you for César. Gaston and I have two pages of his Commentaries to read and translate. Aren't you surprised to find this name under the pen of your giddy child? As for me, I was stunned to learn that I was going to meet the august shadow of the famous Roman on our shores. I couldn't believe it. Just think, Mother, Caesar, the real Caesar, the ancient Caesar.
Ah! I thought I'd buried him under my desk during my holidays and that I wouldn't hear any more about him until the day I reopened my Roman history. Not at all, he's here, his dominating gaze has contemplated these horizons, his victorious legions have trodden this soil. Now I'm determined to follow him to his military encampments; after all, a future Saint-Cyrien can fall in love with Caesar. It seems that when I got up from my folding chair after the lesson, I said to Gaston: "Are you coming, César? He's been laughing ever since and calls me Vercingetorix, he says, so as not to take me out of my train of thought. I accept the name: it's that of a defeated man, but the bravest of the defeated.
XI -- Neptune the sexton. -- A sentimental foal. -- A shark's nest. -- Mignonnette, a tourist.
Today was a great feast day at Saint-Pierre, Mother, the patron saint's day; we attended the services in the church, which was highly decorated for the occasion. Our Lady of Good Cheer looked as if she were leaving for heaven with her large bouquet; the ship in the nave was luxuriously decorated; the two little cherubs in the corner of the altar looked down on the faithful through a veil of richly embroidered tulle; the sun, which was part of the festivities, lit up the old capitals and their bizarre designs. -- There was a large crowd, and it was a very contemplative crowd. Among them were some who were scratching their heads furiously, others who were pinching themselves underneath, and very small ones who didn't know how to turn around and who looked naively at the audience. Once the service had begun, everyone gradually became more disciplined; those who could read sang, the more ignorant prayed the rosary, and the youngest recognised that they had to face the altar: only the scratchers did not completely abandon their little exercise, which made you itch.
My uncle, Gaston and I were seated in the choir; above my head was one of those venerable capitals that have seen so many generations of men.
Neptune and Piérik were part of the ceremonial staff. You know that Piérik is an altar boy; on this big day he was wearing slippers, a little calico alb that showed off his thick trousers, a red cotton sash, and he was very serious; he sang all the hymns very well. As for Neptune, he was standing in for his cousin the beadle, who is ill; I loved to see him bow his old grey head at the altar, which he never bows; I'm sure, Mother, that God loves the prayers of people like Piérik and Neptune, who are so honest and such good workers. The service was a bit long, but I think I made good use of my time: I won't hide from you that I wasn't too angry when Neptune squeezed the wicks of the candles with his fingers, which is his way of extinguishing them; he takes this burning wick between his thumb and forefinger like a wisp of seaweed, and the torch is extinguished before his rough skin has felt a thing.
As we left the church, we passed several times through the crowd, who kindly wished us good morning. However, I have heard some foreigners say that the Bretons are dishonest and don't say hello very often. I think these people were considered to be strangers. For us, who live among these good people, we find them very friendly. They see us walking and praying with them, and I remember that on leaving the church, it was a tall sailor who gave my aunt holy water, quite simply, which made me offer some to an old hunchback who was at my side and who couldn't reach the font.
I assure you, Mother, that I love the simplicity and pride of the Breton people. I'm very happy when Neptune calls me his little brother, and the other day I saw that my aunt let him call her: my dear sister.
When Berthe heard him say that, she made a disdainful little face; it was hard for her to understand that the good Neptune was not showing his mother any disrespect. She was scolded a little for this little gesture of pride, which she repented of so well that from my balcony I heard her say to the old man that very evening: "Neptune, you always call Gaston and Robert your little brothers, and you never call me your little sister.
Neptune put his big hand on Berthe's head and said: "Good little sister of the good Lord, you love the poor world.
Mum, I'd like you to get to know Neptune, and that's only possible if you come to Saint-Pierre, because he told me that he's anchored here until he leaves home feet first, in his coffin.
Gaston and I wrote today; my uncle claims that we can fight on the field of history, and yet you know that my cousin is two years older than I am; that doesn't stop me from hoping so much to be the first, that I have entrusted him to Berthe.
This morning I went to a small beach near the village with the intention of correcting and completing my essay; I thought it would be better to work outside than in my room, but I found I don't know how many distractions. Microscopic crabs were crawling out of the sand at my feet, and I couldn't help enjoying myself by disturbing their progress; I was drawn to a charming little puddle and abandoned political history for a moment for fanciful philosophy; then a farmer came to bathe a grey mare and her foal, and I followed the scene with my eyes. The mother went peacefully into the sea, but the child reared up and showed a horror of water equal to that of Fidelio. So the cunning farmer led him along a path to the middle of a sandy peninsula. The foal, still finding dry land under his hoof, was fooled by the deception; the sea came gently in and the peninsula became an island! The old farmer had gone back to the other side, and the foal, who didn't dare follow him, seeing the water ahead of him, remained alone on the island! He amused me for a long time with his gambols and mad runs. He looked like a wild horse galloping across a steppe, or a merry-go-round horse circling his rope. I tried to sketch him with his flowing mane, his open nostrils and his slender legs, but I'm not strong enough and I could never get my poor horse to gallop, who looked like a wooden horse on my paper.
This pretty spectacle lasted a good half hour; from time to time I saw the old farmer appear on the other side, who had hoped to see the foal swim away in fright. Little by little, the old man approached me and we started talking. It was to familiarise the foal with the water that he had made him a prisoner on this island. I'll tell you our conversation again:
This little devil of a foal has the head of a Breton," said the good man, running his hand over his hard, rough forehead like some of the pebbles I've seen around me; "he doesn't want to bathe, and when he has to cross a pond he goes berserk. Today I played a good trick on him that will cure him of his ailment.
- But what if he wants to stay on this little island until tomorrow?
- First of all, schoolboy," he replied, giving the military salute, "don't you know that the sea is rising and that this sand will disappear before half an hour? Then, as the work is urgent, I'll find a way to get it out of there.
- And how? You'll have to swim out, and once you've reached the island, will he let you catch him?
- When I was your age," said the peasant, laughing, "all this would have been easy for me, easier than learning to read block letters; but now that I'm old, I have other ways of doing things, you'll see.
He left, then returned holding the heavy grey mare by the bridle. The foal had both felt and seen his mother, he neighed, leapt up and stopped at the edge of the island, quivering and attentive. The farmer took the halter and walked towards the sea, then turned sharply towards the shore, dragging the animal, which turned its head towards the island; just as they were about to disappear into the path, the foal jumped into the water, swam out and joined the mare in a gallop.
Good day, schoolboy," shouted the man, smiling, "and don't forget this.
I won't forget it, mother; that's how even bullies like it. Fidélio and the foal have taught me what devotion is, even in an animal. Wasn't that a great lesson for me?
As you can see, dear Mum, I didn't philosophise about a simple puddle today; but in the end my poor essay stayed in my blotter, and your schoolboy, as the good man says, left the shore without having reread a sentence of his homework.
Get away from the noise and the people so that you can acquire greater powers of meditation!
Will I be first? I still hope so, but less firmly
I hate to tell you this, mother, but I wasn't first. I would have been very proud to beat Gaston in that subject, since he beat me everywhere except in narration. I'd have had to reread and look after myself, and I've been rambling. I console myself by thinking that Gaston is a year older than me, and I intend to take my revenge. I won't be going out on the beach any more in the hope of working better by isolating myself more; I'll simply stay in my room, where I don't have the slightest opportunity to philosophise, and where nothing and nobody bothers me. All the same, it's vexing: I had discreetly communicated my hopes to Berthe. Here's a little girl who might laugh at me and stop believing me. I'm vexed, very vexed; if only I'd bragged to you about being the first!
Mother, I'm delighted, I've picked a nest of sharks from the sea. Sharks are a family of fish like the ray and the dogfish, and from now on you can expect to hear me cleverly saying to Julie: "Your black shark was worthless.
So the sharks deposit their eggs in very elegant little bags, tied at the corners with yellow leather cords that tie them to the sea plants. And I've met one. I'm bringing it to you with its little strings, which look like very fine violin strings; it's charming and so ingenious!
Tomorrow we start our archaeological tours, and our supplies are ready. My aunt has put in a corner of my room: a complete suit of coutil clothes, a small sheet overcoat, tightened in a leather strap, a wide-brimmed straw hat, a soft cap, good big iron shoes, a pair of espadrilles for strikes, a flask, a satchel that I have not yet visited thoroughly. Gaston is fully equipped like me. Berthe, who has agreed to come with us, is also arranging her tourist outfit and never tires of showing off her little yellow leather boots and those of Mignonnette. Berthe has a whole family of dolls, but her favourite is Mignonnette, a sturdy little doll, whom she dresses up in the prettiest costumes: she has her bathing costume, her tourist costume, and she is tied up in my uncle's big satchel.
The little ones will stay with my maid; they shed a lot of tears, but there really is no way of taking children on such tiring excursions.
We shall travel most often by sea; my uncle has hired a very good sailing boat, which Neptune and Piérik will row and sail; we shall put the boat back in a bay, and make our rounds on foot; we shall dine in the hotels we come across, and if there is no hotel, we shall make do with what my aunt will put up in the little portable buffet that accompanies us.
My uncle has asked us to write down our observations, our adventures, to give an account of our days.
I will write it first for you, dear mother, and from now on you will receive notes, real travel notes, sometimes long, sometimes short; I will put into it all my knowledge, or rather all my uncle's, and this winter we will read it, won't we, mother? It will be great fun to talk about the Gulf of Morbihan and Caesar's tables by the fire.
See you tomorrow.
XII -- Up to your neck in antiques. -- Hail to Caesar and his legions.
At six o'clock in the morning we were up and at seven we were heading for the jetty. Our boat, pompously christened the Brillante, although more modest than brilliant, rocked on the waves. Neptune, wearing the rolled-up hat on which the name of his old ship sparkled in gold letters, held his oar at the stern, and Piérik, bareheaded and barefoot, held his at the bow. The jib, the small triangular sail at the front, had been lowered, and the brigantine, the other sail, was wrapped around the single mast.
We embarked and headed for the island of Gavr'inis, or Goat Island, which is famous in the region for its antiquities. When you row, you never go very fast, and our big boat only had two rowers, one already old, the other still small. My uncle took advantage of our slow walk to refresh our memories of our last geographical lecture, and he had us draw on our knees the configuration of the land around us.
The Gulf of Morbihan is a veritable archipelago, dear mother, and Neptune claims that it contains as many islands as the year contains days. What is certain is that there are islands of every size, shape and name.
How pleasant it must be to live on an island! My mouth is watering, and if you want, when I'm grown up, we'll buy one and live there Robinson-style. Berthe will join us if we promise to give her a white goat. I told her we'd give her a white one and a black one, and that she could play shepherdess all she wanted. Then she went to consult my aunt about the shepherdess costume that would suit Mignonnette, and I tacked to answer my uncle, who, while we were sailing along a pretty island, thought he'd ask us about the mounds we saw there. He gave us a thorough examination, and I gave a very good answer: I gave a name to each of the elevations that appeared at the end of my spyglass, which Gaston didn't do, because he was always wrong.
All the names of the Druidic monuments in this country are so strange, dear Mummy! Have you ever heard of a peulvan or a cromlech? I've been paying attention and now I know all about them, to the delight of my uncle, who is a great archaeologist and can tell a galgal from a barrow at first glance. The word galgal means mound: it's a huge pile of stones with no soil or cement. It was you, Mother, who taught me the name of one of the first galgal builders. Take a guess! Now you're intrigued. Well, it's Jacob, the patriarch of the Bible. A barrow is a mound of stones mixed with earth; it is also known as a tumulus, combelle, etc. A dolmen, literally a stone table, is a huge stone placed, as best it can, on supports or even on the ground; a menhir, literally a long stone, is a huge stone planted in the ground like a column; cromlechs are stone circles.
What is all this? Where does it come from? Are they tombs? Are they altars? What was the purpose of this? What does this mean?
The scholars made long speeches, felt the stones, put on their glasses and scratched their foreheads, not daring to say anything. It's all so old, Mother, and so dumb!
Do you know that what we are about to visit is as old as the world!
XIII -- The Gavr'inis tumulus. -- Caesar again. -- A mastodon of the mineral kingdom. -- My theory of the diluvian flood.
We arrived off Gavr'inis and dropped anchor; the island is charming, it's a farm in the middle of the sea, and there are trees. We immediately headed for the tumulus that had appeared to us from afar, and climbed up to the so-called sepulchral cave, between two crumbling stone walls.
Neptune, with a large key, a candle and matches in his hands, preceded us as our guide. Here we were, in front of the small rusty iron door that closed the entrance to the underground passage. Berthe, who had been walking bravely ahead of us, shrieked and stepped back to take my uncle's hand. Neptune lit the candle, the big key turned with a creak, the door opened and showed us a large dark hole. I follow Neptune into a narrow, dark gallery whose walls are made of oddly tattooed stone. The light shows us undulating lines, zigzags, snakes, drawings, like the waves sometimes trace on fine sand.
We make our way silently along the dark corridor: we know we're in the middle of the unknown, we've got three thousand years on our shoulders, and that's a serious feeling. The gallery leads to a rectangular chamber made up of eight large menhirs standing vertically; the ceiling is a colossal granite table. Here we huddled together and were able to breathe. A hole cut between two menhirs and Neptune's candle provided sufficient light for the cave, and my uncle, who had Berthe wrapped up in the front of his frock coat, quickly reminded us of the scientific talk he had given us about this famous cave. He had us study the hieroglyphics traced on the stones.
What we thought were simple wedges were celts or druidic axes. The druids never used iron, iron being an impure metal for them; their sacred knives, their celts, were made of granite or flint, sometimes jade; there they were in front of us, sharp at one end and razor-sharp at the other. The ones we saw were small, but there were some that were 45 centimetres long; those were real axes.
My uncle pointed out to us a stone in the wall that had been hollowed out in the middle, in such a way that on this hollow there are some sort of handles or rings that have provoked and continue to provoke much discussion among archaeologists. Berthe, who had become tame, passed her hand over and over again in these stone coves, and ended up sitting Mignonnette in the terrible hollow whose use my uncle was trying to explain to us. Some, believing that the cave was a place of sacrifice, say that the victims were tied to these rings; others, imagining that it was a place of initiation into the Druid religion, say that the hollow contained the lustral water; others, seeing it only as a cemetery, think that the sepulchral lamps hung from these rings.
My aunt and Berthe, who were in a great hurry to leave, cut the explanations short, and my uncle kept quiet out of indulgence. I listened with interest, but I was very happy to leave the underground and I had a wonderful romp when I found myself in the open air.
We climbed to the top of the tumulus, which looks a bit like the crater of an extinct volcano, and we admired the view all around us. We were flying over the Morbihan, and my uncle said that the landscape reminded him of the Orient. It was very pretty: the sea was so blue, so bright around all these islands so picturesquely cut out; the sun lit up the villages, the little granite steeples, the trees, so well that it was a pleasure to look around. And finally, this beautiful country, these charming islands, are the ancient land of the famous Venetians, and the shadow of Caesar loomed over us. I am very sorry that no scholar can surely show us the place from which the Roman witnessed the battle of his legions against this people, "who were," he says in his Commentaries, "the most powerful and fiercest in these lands. If I ever become a scholar, I'll try to solve this problem, dear mother, but it takes time to become a scholar. As a soldier, I may have to study Caesar's doings, and if I ever find out where and how this famous battle took place, I'll go and tell my uncle, who is dying to know. But then my uncle will be very old, very old; well, you have to wait, you're never a scientist at my age.
We had dinner on our mound in the shade of our hats; on these heights the grass itself is rare. After dinner we took a tour of the island and went to see a Byzantine-style crucifix in chiselled copper at the guard's house. I had imagined something superb: Byzantine style, imagine that! I only saw a very ugly representation of Christ; my uncle looked at this rusty cross with respect and repeated: "It's definitely Byzantine style".
We stopped for a while under the scorched trees of a very pretty avenue, and then my uncle gave the signal for us to leave, which made us very sad. Gaston, Berthe and I would have put down roots on our island: Berthe always asked for her eternal white goat, Gaston asked for a boat, and I for a gun to shoot the seabirds, the gulls, the loons, the great grey-winged woodcocks.
We asked for a few hours to play hermit, but my uncle pointed out that the wind was capricious and that we might be at sea for a long time. So we went back to the pier and climbed back onto the Brillante, whose little sails were swelling in the wind, so that Neptune and Piérik just had to cross their arms.
We sailed along the pretty islands of Baden and Larmor. How brilliant the sea looked in the sunshine! It was like an immense blue plain strewn with twinkling stars: the sky is hardly as beautiful on a hot summer's evening.
"Oh, but it's raining stars!" cried Berthe, who plunged her two hands into the sea to catch some, but the stars vanished beneath her fingers. Gaston was talking to Neptune about the sea, and Neptune doesn't know much about theory, but he does know a lot about practice. Gaston, like a true sailor, only cares about running the boat. He explained the beautiful red colour of the sails, which I couldn't explain either. The canvas is dipped in a mixture of fir bark and ochre, which preserves them and makes them charming on the water.
My uncle's predictions were not wrong: the wind suddenly died down, and we spent hours doing broadsides, i.e. walking in zigzags, which doesn't make much progress. Finally we were able to land on a jetty quite far from our house. When we arrived home, we found my maid, the children, Fidélio and Griffard, who were going to meet us for the third time. I was a little weary, but I wanted to file my notes so that I would be up to date.
Mother, I'm writing to you perched on the most monstrous piece of stone you'll ever meet. This mastodon of the mineral kingdom, as my uncle calls it, this granite whale, has washed up very close to Saint-Pierre. Sitting on its back, marbled with grey and black mosses that form beautiful fins, I'm almost at the level of our bell tower, with our beautiful blue sea on my left and the ocean on my right.
But where did this pebble, which would be twenty-two metres long, come from if it hadn't broken into three? And who broke it? A shepherd tending his cows on the moor told us in all seriousness that a fairy had brought it in her apron! How tall was she and what fabric was her apron made of? As for my uncle, he told us that he felt like he was in the middle of a flood, and we all jumped in.
Finally, here's something phenomenal, which I'll explain in this way. This antediluvian pebble was thrown by the flood into this field, it broke: the break is a beautiful break, very well made, very clean; a second flood came and scattered the fragments, and that's why they are not lengthwise.
We'll say what we like about it, but the scholars don't know much more than that. They attribute the breakage of the giant menhir to lightning. What battery would have provided enough electricity to split the colossus? And above all, what new discharge would have disturbed its fragments? I prefer my flow, my diluvian flow, and since the scientists don't agree, I can choose. What do you say about my flow, mother? It arrives, shaking everything up, rolling its monstrous pebbles over the old world it has just annihilated. It deposits this one at Saint-Pierre, so abruptly that it shatters it, and a second flood separates the fragments.
It is permissible to dream before these phenomena. If you could only see it, Mother! If you could only see it!
After half an hour galloping along the menhir and its fragments, we jumped onto a small path, then into a field adorned with a magnificent stone. This stone, huge and polished, is regularly placed on pillars, the main one of which is pointed, but this does not prevent the stone table from appearing immutable. It is known as Caesar's table or the Merchants' table; you can imagine that I immediately preferred the first of these names. The pillars supporting it show signs reminiscent of those in the Gavr'inis cave.
Berthe wanted us to have a dinner party on this famous table, and the snack was spread out on it. We sat in a circle and ate with an appetite whetted by two hours by boat and an hour's walk.
XIV -- The floor of the cows. -- The stones of Carnac. -- Terrible drama.
Mother, today Neptune has his valet's coat and hat on, and it is Krack, good little Krack, who is taking us to Carnac. Berthe and Mignonnette are along for the ride. The druidic stones of Carnac are famous, and the little girls have been admitted.
My uncle and aunt seemed happy to get away from the shores for a while; I'm not mad about seeing trees and grass either; Berthe and Mignonnette agree with me; Gaston and Neptune alone say that they would give all the landscapes in the world for a view of the ocean: the ocean never tires them.
This, it seems to me, is a characteristic trait of their maritime vocation. As for me, I used to cheer every time a pine tree rose from a slope, and I used to salute the moors covered in pink heather.
We stopped off at Krack's birthplace, where he kept an indifferent air between his stretchers, and visited the church, which was very pretty and where we met a holy bishop whose name had perhaps never occurred to him: Saint Thuriaf.
Then we drove to Auray, Alré , as Neptune says, who is always mixing his Breton with his French. Berthe pulled Mignonnette out of the saddlebag just as the square tower of the church of Auray came into view, so that she could see the town.
Auray is a very pretty town and very interesting, historically speaking. In a valley pointed out to us by my uncle's finger and spyglass, the famous battle took place in which Charles de Blois was killed, which effectively ended the war of succession between him and Jean de Montfort, which was bloodying poor Brittany; over there, we can see the statue of Saint Anne, very close to the place famous for so many pilgrimages. A little further on, my uncle's finger and spyglass rest on a mass of buildings: this is the Carthusian monastery next to the Champ-des-Martyrs; the prisoners of Quiberon were put to the sword on the banks of the Loch, which is the river of Auray.
Leaving Auray, we crossed a wooded and rugged country. Berthe pointed out to Mignonnette, who is her confidante, all the curiosities of the landscape, and gravely asked her what she thought of the difference in the air. As it is understood that Mignonnette has a delicate chest, she must have preferred the sweet, fragrant air of the woods to the salty, slightly harsh air of the ocean.
Krack opened his nostrils, Neptune dilated his wide nostrils; still lost at the bottom of a deep ravine, they could smell the Ocean. As we approached, we said goodbye to the trees, the heather, the meadows and the fields of yellow wheat; here were moors stretching as far as the eye could see; great dark stones stood sentinel-like from far and wide, and the further we went, the more of them there were. In Carnac, stones replace trees: there's a deluge of them, it's truly prodigious. We enter the town; my uncle orders our lunch and invites us to follow him to church, an invitation that makes Mignonnette disappear into the saddlebag.
The church at Carnac is no ordinary church, dear Mum; its granite tower is truly charming; it has an altar of Italian marble, and the whole life of Saint Cornély is told on its panelling. The whole vault is covered in frescoes, which, I must say, bear no relation to those by Hippolyte Flandrin that you so often made me admire in our Saint-Germain des Prés. The sacristan showed us the riches of the sacristy, including a sort of small blue stone cut into a teardrop shape, which at first seemed quite insignificant.
"I asked my uncle, who was turning it over and over in his fingers with a strange reverence.
Guess what, Mother! It was three thousand years old. This stone was part of a necklace discovered in one of those caves where scholars lose their Latin. You can understand why I too looked at the little stone with respect.
Once we'd visited the church, we headed back to the hotel. When lunch was over, Berthe took her daughter Mignonnette, and we walked, led by a ragged little guide, to the eminence on which stands a chapel dedicated to Saint Michael.
From this tumulus you can see a magnificent panorama of land and sea, and you can see the famous rock formations for which Carnac is famous. We descend towards the nearest ones and enter a moor full of these stone monsters. If the sight of a lone menhir is astonishing, judge for yourself the impression you feel when you find yourself in the presence of a group of these colossi strewn in the most magnificent disorder. You stand still, stunned, not knowing where you are.
"I'm scared", murmured Berthe.
I was cold, Mother, cold in the back; these giants are really strange to see. Gaston and I perched ourselves on the largest of the monsters, which is a pretty good likeness of a petrified camel with no legs. Straddling its hump, covered by a yellow moss saddle, we stood out against the azure sky. Berthe had settled with Mignonnette against a menhir as high and pointed as a pyramid; my aunt was picking flowers; my uncle, his measuring tape in his hand, was taking the measurements of the colossus; Neptune, climbing a nearby stone, was smoking as he looked out over the ocean.
A memory popped into my head.
"Neptune!" I shouted.
He perked up his ears.
"My old Neptune, do you realise that from the top of these stones, I don't know how many centuries are looking down on you?
The man made a gesture of appeal: "Come down from there, my little brother," he shouted, "the wind is capsizing your little head.
After a long rest stop, we followed our ragged guide, who trotted barefoot ahead of us to the moor where less enormous menhirs, but regularly aligned, form a striking ensemble. Mother, there are eleven avenues here that continue far into the distance with interruptions. We walked along them slowly, grouped around my uncle, who gave us the most accredited versions of this strange collection of menhirs. Scholars are still at the guesswork stage: one claims that these stones were the columns of an open-air temple; another sees mausoleums; a third sees Caesar's tents leaning against them.
The locals also have their own legendary version, and it's not the one I like the least. Saint Cornély, pursued by the pagans as far as the sea, says the legend, and not finding the shadow of a boat, turned towards his attackers and with one gesture turned them into stones. For the locals and their children, these menhirs are the soldiers of Saint Cornély.
This patron saint of Carnac protects not only humans, but also animals and their servants. He is invoked in times of epizootic diseases, sick animals are taken to him, and on the main façade of the church, below the tower, he appears in his niche, mitre on his head and flanked by two pictures on which are naively painted two beautiful horned animals.
Part of our afternoon was spent among the menhirs. When it was time to leave, my uncle deputised for Neptune in the village, and our crew met us on the moor. Krack did not honour the stones with a glance, Krack only looks at Neptune and his path. We arrived at Saint-Pierre very tired and I only listened numbly to my maid's account of some new horror committed by Griffard.
My uncle enjoined us to rest our legs and work our minds, and I took advantage of the opportunity to put the finishing touches to my tourist diary; I've set up a little desk on my balcony: that's where I write, looking out at the sea and the shellfish collectors surrounded by gulls searching the mud. It seems hard to spend so much ink, but my uncle has ordered me to do so. Gaston has also made himself at home in his corner of the balcony; writing doesn't seem any more cheerful to him than it does to me. We stick our tongues out at those ugly beams and those big dumb ceilings.
What a drama I've just witnessed from my balcony, dear Mummy: Griffard has strangled Ricoco, and Neptune has knocked Griffard unconscious. I'm going to fetch the corpse of the poor cat, which Julie, who has just appeared, has taken onto her lap. From her seat she hurled a volley of reproaches at Neptune, who was lurking at the back of his hut. What brutality! I'll tell you all about it later.
It's his fault, that's for sure, but that doesn't bring him back to life. Just imagine that the gaunt Griffard thought he'd go prowling around Ricoco. For some time, my maid and Berthe had been very strict with Griffard, who only made rare appearances. When he arrived with his tail down, dead of hunger, he was ruthlessly chased away. Today I thought he looked famished, and when he approached Ricoco perched on his mast, he had a look on his face that should have revealed his appalling intentions. As if playing a game, he began by putting his paw around the parrot's neck. I think so, because Ricoco responded to this treacherous caress with a peck to the face. The furious Griffard grabbed him by the neck and strangled him. A cry from Neptune made him let go immediately, but Ricoco slid to his death in the garden. Neptune leapt towards him and, turning away, grabbed an old pike pole lying against the wall. Griffard had been unwise enough to remain on the old mast, within reach of the pike pole; it came down and he fell flat on his face. Neptune went home with the corpse of his drooling parrot, and my maid ran to help Griffard, who was knocked unconscious on the spot. Gaston and I came to see him dead, then we put him in a basket and threw him into the sea.
On returning from our mournful expedition, we found Julie in tears: her right eye wept with grief and her left with anger. She blamed Neptune most bloodily; she recalled, but exaggerated, Griffard's former qualities.
He would have corrected himself, she assures us: all those vagrant cats had perverted him, but he would have corrected himself; only to see Madame again would have given him less rustic manners; this Neptune is a brutal old man, a ferocious man, an anthropophagus, a hippopotamus.
Ricoco is not dead, dear Mama, he just had to endure a day of illness and a large scratch. I can still see him, drowsy and staggering on the little wall. With the tie that hides the cloth Berthe has wrapped around his scratched neck, he looks like an old teacher. Berthe, who loves all animals, looks after Ricoco, which pleases Neptune, with whom Gaston and I have been at loggerheads since the accident. His justice was too swift, and he feels that we are angry with him.
XV -- We forgive Neptune. -- The storm. -- The disaster.
I have forgiven good old Neptune, Mama. This morning who do I see appearing on the threshold of my room? Neptune with Ricoco on his fist.
Mr Robert, you're angry with me," he said, without daring to enter the flat; "I acted brutally, the cat being yours, who is so good to me. I don't know what the devil told me to knock out that unfortunate Griffard. You see, Mr Robert, when people or things I love are touched, I don't know myself any more. Poor Ricoco has been on all my campaigns, I've often saved him from the pot or the spit, and I've become quite attached to him! So when I thought he was dead, I was carried away by anger, and anger is the worst kind of brandy, it makes a man drunk in a second. So, Mr Robert, I'm very sorry about this accident, and I've come to offer you Ricoco in place of your cat. I know he will be well looked after, you have a good heart, and from this day Ricoco is yours if you want him. He handed me the parrot, with tears in his eyes; I threw myself around his neck and said to him: "I forgive you, old Neptune, and I give you back your Ricoco." I went downstairs with him and we met my aunt, to whom I told the story of Neptune and Ricoco's visit; she was touched and took them into the kitchen. While Neptune is making a nice dinner that doesn't just consist of barnacles, I've come to tell you about our reconciliation.
No expedition today, either on the Brillante, or in the wagon pulled by Krack: Neptune has promised one of his old sailing buddies to go fishing with him. The dear man only has an old walnut hull that's not worth two liards, Neptune told me, and nets that look like they've been woven from oakum thread; it's still fine in the bay, but he's got this mania for wanting to do a big catch twice a year.
We went to take him to the pier.
"Neptune, are you going out in that boat?" said my uncle when he saw the rotten boat into which Neptune was throwing the net he had on his shoulder.
Going out means going from the Gulf into the Ocean.
One last time, sir," replied Neptune; "the boat has had its day and so has the sailor.
- It's a good thing the weather's fine," I said, "this old boat couldn't take the heavy seas.
Neptune looked at the sky and the sea, and shook his head: "I hope to be back before the squall.
- Will there be a squall, Neptune?
- Yes, there will.
- And what if it's a storm?" said Berthe, taking Neptune's big, calloused hand between her two hands.
- I wouldn't leave, my little sister, because that would mean serving supper to the crabs," replied Neptune, jumping into the canoe.
Fidélio, who was gambolling between our legs, jumped in next to him; Fidélio became a great friend of Neptune and Piérik. Neptune grabbed him by the scruff of the neck and threw him to the ground. Fidélio screamed and clung to him. Keep him," we shouted, "this trip will cure him of his fear of water. Fidélio, left free, went to crouch at the front, looking very satisfied.
As Neptune's old friend did not arrive, we left the jetty and, at Gaston's suggestion, headed for the headland to see them pass through the Narrows and enter the ocean. My uncle, Berthe, Gaston, Piérik and I set off across the fields to get there more quickly, and as we approached the headland, we spotted the little boat coming up in the wake of the steamer that serves Belle-Île-en-Mer. She wasn't doing too badly, the wind and sea being favourable. Neptune greeted us as she passed, and Fidélio gave us a knowing bark, but remained comfortably crouched on Neptune's lap. Within five minutes they had reached the ocean, the little boat began to dance on the waves and then disappeared.
We felt so comfortable at the point that we asked my uncle to stay and play. He consulted Berthe, who doesn't exactly like this terrible point bristling with large rocks on which the ocean breaks with a dreadful noise; but Berthe had discovered some charming puddles when she was dragging herself along, and she felt like bathing Mignonnette, who was lying quite peacefully at the bottom of my uncle's satchel. We discovered a pretty little grey marble bathtub that delighted her. There's nothing quite like puddles in sharp rock, Mother; the water is warm and so transparent that you can see the plain, shiny bottom, or the one paved with charming little shells.
At last Mignonnette is going to be able to take a bath," said Berthe happily, "I'm going to let her try on her bathing costume.
Mignonnette the tourist has, I think I told you, a complete wardrobe, and we had great fun seeing her perched on a rock in her bathing costume. My uncle, who was laughing heartily, came to watch the bathing, which was a very difficult operation, as the porcelain limbs alone had to plunge into the water; but we soon left Berthe and Mignonnette to their little girl games, and we fought to see who could climb the peaks better. Piérik is much stronger than we are at these gymnastics, and he taught us how to climb. He leaps over those rocks as if he were made of rubber, he walks over those jagged rocks like a goat; he is so careful and at the same time so agile that he never hurts himself.
We would have liked to spend the whole day on our point and come back to wait for the old boat, but today is study day, and a big cloud that is turning as black as ink tells us that the squall predicted by Neptune is forming above us.
Oh, Mother, what a storm! First we had a squall, a shower that would burst through the roofs, then the flow brought the storm, the real, terrible storm. The sky became completely overcast; a wind, which seemed to blow from the four cardinal points at once, jostled the waves and made them rise to frightening heights; the sea became so rough that all the boats hastily returned to the roadstead. We are worried about all the fishermen who have gone out, and for our part we wonder what has become of Neptune's poor walnut hull on these mountains of water and under the almighty blast of this storm; Piérik hopes that the fishermen have entered some nearby port.
My grandfather knows all about storms," he told me, "this morning he almost predicted it, he didn't want to get on board, but he was hoping to get back early.
Thunder, lightning, a gale-force wind, and it's been going on for four hours! I can see Piérik and Marianna looking sadly out to sea. Piérik has gone I don't know how many times from one jetty to the other; the sea is receding and Neptune has not appeared. All the boats have gone home, except his.
There are women running towards the shore, shouting and raising their arms to the sky. Gaston opens my door and says to me: "Are you coming to the shore, it's not raining and the storm may have driven some sea monster onto the shore where it will have washed ashore. It seems to me that these screaming women are saying that there is something extraordinary to see.
We set off to explore.
Dear Mum, what a sight awaited us on the Dykes shore, where we ran after the panicking women! Alas! it was not a sea monster that we saw, but an old boat aground, the boat of Neptune's friend, and not far from the boat two corpses, that of the old fisherman and that of Fidélio. My poor dog! How I cried, Mama, when I saw him all shiny and swollen and dripping with water. We kissed him and would have cried out in pain like the women, some of whom were relatives of the drowned fisherman. The men are going to go from shore to shore looking for the body of our poor Neptune. It's definitely the boat, it's definitely the old fisherman, it's definitely Fidelio; tomorrow morning the tide will no doubt bring back Neptune's body, if it doesn't turn up on the other shores. This death is very sad for us, because we loved Neptune so much, and for Piérik and Marianna, who are now orphans. What an evening, Mother! that corpse carried away by the fishermen, my poor Fidelio buried in the sand, Piérik and Marianna running along the shore, on the rocks, tearing out their hair, calling out for their grandfather, that return at night with the poor children, whom my uncle forces to go home! no, I had never seen anything so moving or so sinister!
Marianna is going to sleep in my maid's room, who has a very good heart, as you know; Piérik wanted to go back to his hut: Piérik is no longer crying and is suffering like a man.
It's barely nine o'clock and it's as dark as midnight; it's hot, very hot, and I leave my window open. I can hear the wicked sea roaring, but I can't see it; a black curtain covers everything outside. From time to time, electric lights flash across the sky and illuminate the sea. It's a beautiful sight, Mother. Everything is dark; then a bluish glow slips under the black clouds and casts a trail of light over the water: it's fantastic. Gaston came to his balcony and called me over; I went to mine and we talked about our poor Neptune and Fidélio. Suddenly I'm inside; I think the electric lights are blinding me: just now I thought I saw Neptune in person, in front of his house!
Gaston closes his window, I'll close mine. Come on, one more flash of lightning and I'll leave my balcony.
Mother, I came home all scared. As I was closing my window, two electric lights crossed and I thought I saw Neptune in front of the little hole that lights up his hut. What a shiver I felt! How quickly I closed my window, shut my shutters and pulled down my curtains! My mind is so full of the accident, my eyes so tired from the electric light, that I'm probably daydreaming. I'm going to say my prayers at full gallop and try to fall asleep to forget my silly vision: I know very well that there are no ghosts.
XVI -- The shipwreck. -- I turn the colour of mahogany. -- The tile.
Mummy, dear Mummy, I wasn't dreaming last night, Neptune is alive, very alive. It's broad daylight, I can see him sitting by his fireplace, smoking his pipe, and I can hear Berthe and Gaston calling me, shouting: "Come on, Neptune's not drowned.
What luck! I hadn't been fooled, he's safe. I'll see you later for the details, and I'm off to kiss my dear old sailor.
My dear Mum, wolves of the sea are very strange: they are not the ones who will ever deserve to be described as impressionable. Neptune, while mending his net, has just told us about his shipwreck: he looked as if he'd just had a bath. It seems that the stubbornness of the old fisherman, his comrade, was the real cause of the disaster: he refused to enter the roadstead in time, and when the dislocated boat took on water, it was no longer time, the boat was sinking. Neptune, the old fisherman and Fidélio swam out, but the waves soon separated them. Neptune headed for Port-Navalo and swam until he was exhausted. Seeing that he was still quite far from land, he cautiously landed on an islet of rocks that the sea had just uncovered, where he remained exhausted and half-dead with fatigue.
While we searched the shore for his body, he slept on the islet. He left it in the evening, just as a boat was arriving to which he had signalled. The passengers who had come from Locmariaquer lent him some clothes and told him what had happened to his fellow passengers; he got them to disembark him at Pointe Saint-Pierre, and walked quietly back to his home, where he arrived at eleven o'clock at night.
I asked him what he had been thinking when he drowned.
"Twice, one day in the Gulf of Mexico, another day at the mouth of the Danube, I thought I was taking my last plunge. I recited my act of contrition, recommended the children to Saint Anne of Auray, commended my soul to God and went for a swim.
Piérik and Marianna were very happy to have their grandfather back, and Ricoco shook his head and jabbered as if he understood that a great happiness had befallen him.
What lovely plans we have, dear Mama! Neptune will give us a real sailing lesson on the old wreck. The local carpenter is going to restore a bit of order inside, and we'll learn the technical terms of navigation as we play, no more and no less than if we were candidates, that is to say, aspirants to the coasting master's certificate. On the other hand, we're preparing to build a small semaphore on the leading edge of a very dangerous breakwater.
Gaston is racking his brains to find the lighting system, while I'm all about the construction, which requires endless calculations. I have to tell you that your engineer son is very often embarrassed, and that he sees the bumps multiplying on his lighthouse, which has to be as straight as an I. These major projects keep us busy without tiring us.
You won't recognise me: I've grown two inches; my face, hands and feet are the colour of mahogany and I'm as thin as a nail, but perfectly healthy; I sleep like a log and eat like a starving man.
My aunt laughs with pleasure when she sees us attacking the bread. Gaston and I are making terrible trenches. Little mother, where are the days when your delicate dumplings were heavy on my stomach, when I used to make a fuss over my maid's beefsteaks, which used to worry you? It seems to me that now I could digest stones. I can see you smiling from here at that ogre's word.
Oh, Mother, what a tile is hanging over our heads! I was unwise enough to write to Louis about the pleasant life we lead here, and now his mother thinks she's coming to Saint-Pierre. I've had a terrible day. I hope that the tile will go back into the roof and that it's just a false alarm.
Mother, don't worry, I haven't confided my troubles to anyone, not even Gaston, who doesn't remember Louis very well. People attribute my gloomy appearance to my knowledge of my aunt's character, who everyone knows is fussy.
I'll let that assumption stand, even from Gaston. It's Louis, who is touchy, mocking, false, secretive, and who always ends up blaming you for the nonsense he has provoked.
I know that there are two of us against him, because Gaston, who is very clear-sighted, won't have heard him say twenty words before he knows it; but in the end his presence alone will annoy me and will certainly interfere with our independence, our games and our work. You know how important it is to look after him always and everywhere.
My aunt Ludovic, Louis and Marguerite have moved in here, dear Mum.
My aunt finds everything charming, even the little pigs she meets along the way. "This delight will last twenty-four hours," Louis said in my ear.
Louis is still the same, with very little respect for his mother, full of self-confidence, absolutely preoccupied with himself and very sullen towards Marguerite. Marguerite has grown up a lot, I wouldn't have recognised her. Gaston says she's very pretty: I think her nose is too long; but she's certainly very good and very patient. We're all very fond of her already. Berthe is always hanging on his arm, like Louis on Gaston's arm, whom he tries to dazzle by telling him impossible stories in which he is always the hero.
Gaston told me this morning that he was knocking her out. I promised Mum eight great days of self-denial," he added, "and I'll keep my word; but after that I'll act like a cousin and we'll each sort things out in our own way.
We suspended our major works, as we had to.
Louis has no taste for things of this kind, so we play piquet with him, and he is very fond of cards; we take my aunt for a walk along the shore and hide in the rocks to smoke. This is a bit like smuggling, but Louis takes us along. He has a supply of excellent cigars and even a very elegant meerschaum pipe.
Yesterday my aunt was once again extolling the virtues of her son, and she ended with this bouquet: "What delights me is that Louis does not yet smoke to please me.
Marguerite, Gaston and I lowered our eyes, blushing like young girls.
XVII -- Louis's whims. -- Obeliscale. -- Piérik's dressing room. -- The party. -- I collect.
I can no longer tell you that I am enjoying myself at Saint-Pierre. The whims of Louis and his mother are disturbing the peace of our earthly paradise. Everything is being disrupted, homework and games alike. What can be arranged is disrupted, what can be started is stopped: it's both comic and depressing.
Today we were to spend the day on the semaphore strike, where, to our great joy, we were going to resume work. The tents, folders, swimming costumes and baskets of provisions were loaded onto Krack; Neptune and Piérik carried the tools; we walked for ten minutes. My aunt had seen a black cloud on the side of Larmor, and Louis had a sore foot. As soon as he didn't like one part of it, he got a horn that made it impossible for him to walk. The walk was called into question, and there was a great deal of hesitation. At least if he'd let us go, but no, Louis gets bored like a mollusc when he's alone, and so does my aunt, so that while they say: "Go without us, leave us alone", they look so annoyed that we do the opposite of what they say. We had to fold up and hear my aunt Ludovic murmur as she fanned herself: "It's for you that I'm staying more than for me; the storm that's brewing would certainly have turned this fun party into an inconvenience."
Louis laughed underneath, because he was triumphant: he had told me in the morning that all our buildings bored him and that he was determined to stop the walk. He kept his word, and I am writing to you to relieve my boredom and forget my annoyance, which is very strong.
My uncle and my aunt put up with these inconceivable whims with admirable patience, but I don't think they will agree to see disorder always creeping into the way we spend our days. Gaston has it in for Louis, who ironically calls us Orestes and Pylades. "Gaston said to me this morning: "It's just a little brainwave.
Mother, don't worry, I only smoke with my uncle's permission, and I don't deserve much credit for it, because, I confess, my heart is in my throat and I don't have the silly idea of disobeying you to make myself ill.
Gaston, who must be a sailor, has a particular taste for cigars; but he is very conscientious and wouldn't smoke one outside the number allowed by his father.
Louis smokes like a dragon, always posing. His large pipe, his newspaper and half a dozen large yellow hairs that he calls his moustache give him good air, he thinks, and he prides himself on it.
If he smoked, read and twisted his yellow moustache at home, we wouldn't bother; but this great man can't be left alone for a moment, and he insinuates himself into all our plans... to disturb them. We'd have given him a scolding by now if it hadn't been for Marguerite. What a sister Marguerite is, Mum! Her brother teases her, annoys her, bullies her in a thousand ways, but she always remains patient and affectionate towards him. I assure you that if I'd been lucky enough to have a sister like Marguerite, I wouldn't have imitated that naughty Louis, who takes his title of head of the family the wrong way round and wants everyone at his feet. Marguerite, who is very witty, guesses our feelings for her illustrious brother and often suspends our malice towards him. If you could only see the pleading look she gives us when we play one of those schoolboy tricks that make him so angry! If you could only see the way she gives up what amuses her to stay and play piquet! And note that during these games Louis mistreats her in one way or another: if she wins, he's unhappy; if she plays badly, he's furious. Yesterday he so abruptly removed the chair she was sitting on that she almost fell over. Orestes and Pylades shouted at the same time: "Do that again and we'll give you a battery.
"Marguerite will be a good little woman," said my uncle, who removed her from her brother's tyrannical demands.
Louis fills my diary, you tell me, my dear Mum; it's just that he annoys us so much that we're always talking about him. Fortunately, our conversation often turns into a joke.
Last night, on the balcony, he was telling us about the visit he had made to the flagship in Brest. He had been the focus of attention, the only person who had spoken to him, and he had been singled out by all the senior officers.
After glorifying himself for half an hour, he left the balcony, judging that we were not paying him enough attention. The fact is that while he was talking, I was throwing lead pellets at Ricoco's paws and Gaston was spitting into a small puddle formed by the latest downpour. When he left, we looked at each other and laughed.
"Gaston said to me, "How fatuous!
I replied, raising my arms: "Immense!
- A weak adjective," said Gaston, "try harder.
- Gigantic!
- I can't find it.
- Pyramidal!
- Oh, very banal.
- Titanesque?
- Pretentious, and then it doesn't make a picture.
- What doesn't?
I looked for something that would make an image and I don't know how the obelisk, which struck me so much by its height when I was little, came back into my memory.
Obelisk!" I exclaimed.
- Oh, very good," said Gaston; "that's new, we'll send your adjective to the immortals.
Since then, whenever our boy boasts, we mutter: "Obeliscale!
It's called making the best of a bad situation.
Would you like a little genre painting, dear Mum, here's one. I get up and go out onto my balcony to see the colour of the sky and the sea. He's looking at himself in a small mirror wedged between two stones that look like a fragment of wave, and he's smoothing his hair with an old brush that my maid gave him yesterday. He's chosen quite a nice bathroom, that Piérik!
Our village is on the move, tomorrow is one of the patron saint's feasts, the church is all decked out inside, and there's a beautiful maypole... in the square. Against the wall of the cemetery, between the letterbox and the small printed wooden frame at the bottom of which the important posters are stuck, we have just seen a large poster which Gaston and I hasten to go and read.
It's completely official: regattas, sailing races with or without daggerboards; piloting, marking or fishing boats, with or without deck; forbans and sinagots; rowing, sculling, and moss racing; mast climbing and duck racing.
While we were reading this superb poster, Neptune approached us.
"Is the seaweed cup displayed there?" he asked us.
Against the regatta poster was a paper on which we read out loud:
"The second cut of seaweed for heating takes place from 16 August to 16 October.
That's it," said Neptune, "I won't be committing myself for next week and you gentlemen can try to do without Piérik.
Gaston and I grimaced: we had just planned to go for lunch on a distant shore, very favourable for fishing, and Piérik was to be our master rooster. My maid has trained him very well for this job: he sets the table perfectly, he heats the broth, cooks the crabs and makes the coffee. We'll have to postpone our expedition.
I must confess, mother, that I found the party very nice, especially as it was unlike any other. The square was packed from the morning onwards. Out at sea, the tidal launches were decked out. Quite a large number of boats passed each other on the sea, which was bright and smooth. A tent had been erected for the Auray orpheonists, whose chords are very pretty to hear in the open air. A brilliant piece was played, and the boats in the rowing race set off: this string of boats is very graceful. They disappear, then return towards the goal; we see a black dot, the boat; two white dots, the rowers in their shirtsleeves; two long silver blades vigorously whipping the sea, the oars. The people crowded behind us shout: "It's the black one, it's the white one; it's Joachim, it's Jean-Pierre". Just as the boats arrived, I heard them clop, clop, clop: they were kids taking a header and philosophically making the cut in front of the spectators. But now it's the turn of the sailing boats. How elegant they look from afar and on the water, my mother! Some have dazzling white sails, others a fiery red. I used to envy a certain pleasure boat, white from the hull to the top of the mast, which sped across the waves like a beautiful swan. After this long coming and going of boats, the ascent of the cocagne mast begins. Modest ties and long mufflers hung from a wide crown of foliage. We laughed to our heart's content at the efforts of all these brave people; some climbed up pushed by the heads and hands of their competitors; several times a large broom joined in, which was the height of comedy. The ladies found this spectacle slightly trivial, which it was; we laughed no less heartily. But here's the funniest part of the party. From the old lugger, a long plank supported by boards laid in the shape of an X: this was the theatre for duck hunting. One of these birds was thrown from the lugger and landed on the waves; immediately a swarm of children in swimming trunks emerged from the sides of the old ship; they climbed up like cats, threw themselves into the water and chased the duck with their hair stuck to their noses, their skinny arms whipping the waves with extraordinary energy and fury; there was something wild about the scene. The ladies left, and we were left alone to watch this band of little porpoises chasing ducks.
When the awards were handed out, the authorities gathered under the little tent, and the winners, their hair still damp and some of them half-naked, came to collect the prizes due to their vigour or skill. A firework display brought the festivities to a close. I won't say it was beautiful, but it was framed so well that I thought it was excessively pretty. It was fired at the old grounded lugger, whose great black silhouette was reflected in the sea. The rockets passed through such a beautiful sky, and the little showers of fire fell into such beautiful water, that we involuntarily applauded with the crowd.
Suddenly Berthe exclaimed, stretching out her arm: "A ship is burning!
Indeed, on the horizon, a great blaze was lighting up. We couldn't take our eyes off this superb blaze, and speculation ran rife.
We burst out laughing: it was the moon playing a trick of her own. It rose little by little into the sky and remained there so splendidly that, even though the fireworks were over, we asked to extend our evening. If I were a poet, I'd write verses about it, but you know I'm not a poet.
I've just added a sea urchin to my collection. The sea urchin is the sea chestnut. When I saw it underwater I shouted: "A chestnut! Berthe, who heard me, came running, and we were looking hard to see where this strange chestnut had fallen from, as there wasn't a single chestnut tree in sight, when my uncle arrived and told me that what I was holding between my fingers was a zoophyte called a sea urchin. He himself had just picked up a sea urchin from the shore, stripped of its spiny shell, in other words a delicate greenish-white half-ball, regularly decorated with lines formed by small globules varying in size. If you place it between the light and yourself, you see a star with muslin rays. Its shape and the charming stippling on the outside made Berthe want to turn it into a hat for Mignonnette; but we maintain that underneath it Mignonnette looks like a little Turk wearing a turban, which displeases Berthe.
XVIII -- My herbarium. -- A prompter. -- The snake. -- New discoveries. -- At Lorient. -- The great man.
I bring you a charming shell. I have a whole string of them around my herbarium, which is enriched every day with some new marine plant. This herbarium will be very interesting for my friends who don't know the sea, and I'm very happy to look after it. Gaston has discovered, in an interesting book entitled Les Plages de France, a very simple way of preserving seaweed: the seaweed is packed in a bundle until I want to put it in my herbarium. When that time comes, I throw them into fresh water, shake them to help them loosen themselves; then I place a sheet of paper in a shallow dish, pour in pure water, wash my seaweed, dip it in the water until it spreads all its fine serrations, apply it to the paper with a small rod, lift the paper by the corners and put the whole thing to dry under a window.
Louis deigns to come with us to the shore these days, my dear Mum, and I have to tell you that we laugh a lot at the misadventures that happen to him. Very boastful in words, he's quite a coward in reality, and he would make a strange soldier and a strange sailor. Marguerite and Berthe are less delicate than he is and make much better companions. Today he made a scene with Gaston because he had come across a beautiful clump of these blue-green thistles that make a charming effect in the sand.
If you didn't wear your lorgnon, you'd see more clearly," replied Gaston, "and besides, you won't die from stings like that.
Louis hurried off to tell his mother about the incident, and she spent an hour looking for the prickles lost in the sheet of his overcoat. With all his airs and graces, Louis always lets his mother serve and spoil him like a little child. I wouldn't say spoil, but serve! Every day we have some little scene that often turns into a comedy. As soon as my aunt sets foot on the shore, she goes into a perpetual state of agitation; she has only one thing on her mind: to see Louis, and the echoes must have heard his name. She runs after him from here to there, and when it pleases Louis to hide in the rocks to frighten her, she sends us all in search of him. Where is Louis? Have you seen Louis? What has become of Louis? These are the three questions that the wind constantly brings to our ears. She carries his folding folder, his parasol and his shawl to this big lump. He takes everything and receives everything with an air of majestic indifference that disgusts us. By way of contrast, I see Gaston doing the opposite, taking good care of his mother.
Gaston, who is a bit stiff for his friends, is a very good son and a very good brother, and from now on I want to be like him. You'll let me help you, won't you? I've often lacked attention and thoughtfulness. I, who love you so much, never seemed to think about you. But there you go! You've spoiled me a bit too; but that's agreed, you won't spoil me any more and I'll be your attentive servant knight.
If you had heard the scream we gave from the balcony just now, my dear Mummy, you would have been very frightened. Just imagine that, as we were arriving on our balcony, quietly tying our tie, we saw a large black and shiny shape rising above the waves. We let out an involuntary scream and stood there with both ends of the tie in our hands. The shape soon reappeared: it was like a huge black bull swimming between two waters. It's a blower," said Gaston, "let's have a good look. I was terrified at the sight of this enormous beast gliding swiftly past us, sometimes throwing up sprays of foam; we ended up calling out to everyone, but the monster had disappeared. Oh, how strange the sea is, Mum! How many animals live in it! When I first saw it, I thought it was just a rough blue surface, but every day I discover that it contains worlds. I know that others have made this discovery before me, and I intend to read the beautiful illustrated books you bought me last year, of which I have only seen the engravings. You'll see how your lazy son has changed in so many ways.
Mum, you'll find us quite teasing, but we're going to play a famous trick on Louis and I can't resist the pleasure of telling you about it. Just yesterday he made those remarks which we find so distasteful and which tend to show us to be infants, simpletons and pussies, whereas he is a man full of energy, grandeur and resolution. We were already quite irritated when we arrived on the shore; but he has positively knocked the wind out of us. Against his august habits he caught crabs, he made a good harvest of them, and now he has the idea of sowing them on Marguerite's dress. Marguerite is very brave, but she's only a woman and she hates dunces. These repulsions cannot be reasoned out. She ran, she shouted, she shook herself, and he chased after her, catching the dunces, throwing them at her hair and shoulders; we shouted at him to leave Marguerite alone, but he never stopped laughing maliciously and chasing after her.
"It's intolerable!" said Gaston to me; let's give him a battery.
We gained momentum and were raising our fists with the charitable intention of sending Louis rolling into the sand, when my Aunt Ludovic appeared on the cliff and let out such a scream that our arms fell back inert. You can see the mocking, triumphant look on Louis' face as he waddled over to his mother and told her, in his own way, that Marguerite was a terrible coward, that he had tried to toughen her up as a joke and that she had called on us to help her, us who had the cowardice to always unite against him.
During tea, my aunt gave us a face a yard long. Louis was so impertinent and Marguerite so unhappy that we asked my aunt Alphonse as a favour to let us go as far as our semaphore. She allowed it and we made our way to the big strike. After visiting the engineers, we took a bath and Gaston, frolicking around a large rock, was lucky enough to find a small eel. Seeing the beast crawling along the sand, we had the idea of taking revenge on Louis and putting his superb composure to the test. We gave him this pretty conger eel as a companion for the night, and returned with our plan in place. We didn't breathe a word to anyone about our catch, we put the conger eel in a tank full of sea water, we fished it out in time, and Gaston has just forgotten a little fishing basket in a corner of our glorious friend's room, with its lid unsecured. Our only fear is that the conger eel will fall asleep or die at the bottom of its basket without having thought of attempting the slightest excursion into the unknown country where it is.
Let me tell you very quickly, my dear mother, the end of the adventure. Last night, at about eleven o'clock, I was woken up by terrible screams. I couldn't remember anything, so I jumped out of bed, dressed quickly and ran to the room where they were coming from: it was Louis' room. He was standing in front of his door, wrapped in a blanket, his hair bristling, his eyes wide open.
A snake!" he shouted, waving his arms at me; "there's a snake in my room!
The word snake brought it all back to me, and I was about to flee cautiously, but my retreat was cut off by my uncle who came running in, and then my two aunts and Marguerite arrived; Gaston, wiser than I, did not appear. In front of everyone, Louis, who was shaking all over and whose teeth were chattering terribly, said that when he suddenly looked up from the book he was reading, he had seen a snake lying with its head on his bedside table; he was sure he wasn't asleep because he was reading.
My uncle entered the room without saying a word and, taking the candle, inspected the flat. Driven by curiosity, I stayed outside the door, but in the shade, behind my good Aunt Alphonse. I saw my uncle bend down and stand up again, bursting out laughing: the unfortunate conger was wriggling between his fingers. At the sight of the animal, Louis and my Aunt Ludovic fled down the corridor.
But it's only a conger eel!" cried my uncle, still laughing; "it's just hard to explain why it's here. Where is Gaston?
I disappeared completely behind my aunt.
It seems that Gaston hasn't woken up," replied my aunt.
- Isn't that a fishing basket I see in that corner?" said Marguerite.
- It is," replied my uncle; "give it to me, my daughter. This basket explains the adventure, which is very simple. Gaston forgot his fishing basket in this flat.
My aunt turned to me and looked me in the eye, murmuring: "Incorrigible rascals!
Louis, you can take possession of your flat," said my uncle, "I'm taking your snake with me.
He replaced the torch on the little table, I saw him bend down to read the title of a book on the bed and, turning back to Louis, he added very seriously: "If you didn't have the detestable habit of reading in your bed at night, you would have saved yourself and us this alarm.
- Louis likes to study more at night than during the day," said my Aunt Ludovic, "sometimes he works until midnight. What were you reading, my son?
- Quinte Curce", replied Louis with aplomb.
My uncle looked at him sternly, smiled disdainfully and left, motioning to my aunt to follow him. I went back to my room, but I didn't fail to open the door for Gaston, who promptly asked me:
"Did everything go well?
- Very well," I replied. "Did you hear his peacock calls?
- I was a bit frightened by it, and I don't know how our innocent beast could have had such an effect on our hero.
- He took it for the python snake.
I left Gaston choking with laughter under his pillow and went back to mine.
Very curious fishing, Mum, or rather a very curious encounter. There's nothing as unexpected as expeditions to the seaside, nothing more likely to make you patient; you find nothing of what you go looking for and you come across things you never expected to see.
Today I brought back two strange animals in my satchel, whose names and stories I quickly looked up in the useful little book about the sea and its inhabitants. First, let me introduce you to the starfish or asteria; it has five rays, or rather five little arms fitted with suckers, and it crawls along by moving its five arms forward in turn. At first, you don't really know what this little thing is that spreads out like a flower; as my asteria was blue, I only recognised the starfish when I saw it walking. My other conquest is a syngnathus or tubefish. It's the funniest animal you'll ever see; it has a snout-shaped snout and a little fan-shaped tail. Marguerite and Berthe shrieked in horror when I showed off my catch; they really don't have the blood of naturalists in their veins. By the way, this kind of study is not for women. As I like it so much, I spent the whole day with my starfish and my syngnathus in my pocket. All I had to do to scare Marguerite and Berthe away was to carelessly twirl my box between my fingers.
My aunt Ludovic and Louis were beginning to find our hermit life a bit dull. On the pretext of visiting Lorient, they set out to take us on an excursion of their taste.
My uncle was very kind on this occasion and agreed to everything, because this visit would teach me something, he told me.
So we're leaving in an hour, dear Mummy. Berthe is taking Mignonnette, whom she has abandoned a little for Marguerite; the little ones are staying with my maid who, to console them for not coming with us, has just been detailing in a corner the pleasures she would give them: unlimited bathing in puddles, a great carousel of dunces, rice cake and puffed doughnuts.
Mother, you're always preaching patience to me in your letters about Louis, and as always you've been right. Our expedition to Lorient has finally shown him in his true light, and Gaston says that from the look on his father's face, he senses that we don't have long to wait. I'm going to tell you all about our expedition.
The journey from Saint-Pierre to Lorient was delightful; but no sooner had we touched the pavement in Lorient than our little creek started to act up.
First he thought we should separate from our family and go for a walk, just the men, through the town and the port. He went from Gaston to me, throwing words like these at us: "Don't you want to walk around freely? -- Are you going to stay tied like a baby to our mothers' petticoats? -- If we don't get out of here, we'll be taken for visits.
A little appalled, we gave in, and, with his usual aplomb, Louis told my uncle, who was giving his mother his arm, that he wanted to take us to the port to see everything at ease.
Well, we're going to the port," replied my uncle.
- As strollers," said Louis; "we're going as sailors and tourists.
My aunt Ludovic spoke up to say that she had got Louis used to getting out of trouble on his own everywhere, which was a great pleasure. My other aunt retorted that her children were too happy with her to want to go right when she was going left. My uncle, who was smiling through his beard, added that he hoped his son would sooner or later learn to make good use of his freedom and finally gave us the day off until five o'clock.
There are three of you," he said, "make your own arrangements, visit Lorient in your own way, I trust in your prudence and wisdom.
He whispered a few words in Gaston's ear and the three of us left with our caps over our ears, as happy as three birds in the wild.
The good agreement lasted until we reached the Place de la Bove. At the bottom of the square, we were astonished when Louis the tourist walked briskly towards the door of a café!
We've got plenty of time to visit Lorient," he said, "let's go and play a game of billiards.
- I didn't come to Lorient to play billiards," replied Gaston.
We continued walking and Louis followed us. We visited the port with interest.
"Let's go to the arsenal now," said Gaston.
But Louis, stopping in front of a café, said he wanted to rest.
"Rest as you like," I said, "but I only go into a café when I find it necessary."
Already annoyed by our resistance, Louis was seized with anger all of a sudden. Cautiously climbing two steps to get out of our reach, he turned round and said: "You're idiots.
Gaston and I burst out laughing.
And you're a great man," Gaston retorted mockingly.
- A man at least," replied Louis, pulling at the yellow hairs on his moustache.
Gaston jumped up and stood opposite him: "Come on, big man," he said, folding his arms, "will you deign to let us into your confidences? What are your plans? What are you going to do that is too heroic for morons like us?
- You're full of shit," replied Louis, raising his shoulders, "but you're not capable of taking three vermouts in a row!
Gaston leapt back down.
Come on," he said, taking my arm, "let's salute this hero who's going to... drink! drink!
He said this in such a solemn tone and gave Louis such a funny salute that I'm still laughing as I write to you.
Once we had got rid of Louis, we left cheerfully; it seemed to us that the ball and chain we were dragging at our feet had been cut off. We spent a few good hours together, which we put to good use.
Gaston has a talent for winning over seafarers, and it was a race to see who could satisfy our curiosity at the arsenal and the general shop. I didn't remember the technical terms used by the brave workers, but I promise to study them in Gaston's notebook, as he had the good sense to take notes everywhere, even in the foundry and the fitting shops. We finished our studies at the Caudan shipyard, which has eleven slipways, and at the agreed time we met up with our parents in the Place d'Armes, a square shaded by superb lime trees and used as a training ground by naval troops.
"Where did you leave Louis?" my uncle asked us.
Louis appeared at that moment, which spared us an embarrassing reply.
"Where are you from?" asked his mother.
"To see Bisson," he replied, winking at us.
My dear mother, Bisson is a hero, a young ensign who, after having supported the furious attack of one hundred and forty Greek pirates with fifteen crewmen, and seeing them invade the deck of his ship, set fire to the powder keg and jumped with the enemy. He has a beautiful bronze statue in the Place de la Bove and, as you can see, he didn't steal it.
"Louis has very serious tastes," said my Aunt Ludovic, looking at us with a look that meant: while my serious child was looking at Bisson and being inspired by his heroism, you were probably foolishly playing marbles.
We didn't laugh, although it was very funny: isn't it sad to hear a son lie to his mother and ridicule her?
My dear Mum, the real reason why we dislike Louis is this: he lies through his teeth and tricks a mother who idolises him without conscience.
Gaston and I have our faults and we know some friends who have the same inclinations as Louis: we don't hate them like he does, because they're not hypocrites.
We had dinner in a restaurant and afterwards there was a big discussion. Louis wanted to go to the theatre and he'd indoctrinated his mother into it. I must confess that I was very enthusiastic about this project; I think I'd really like the theatre. But my uncle was adamant.
This kind of entertainment was never created for fifteen-year-olds," he said, "and I formally forbid it to Gaston and Robert, for whom I am responsible. Besides, when I take my son to the theatre, it will never be on a second-rate stage. Modern literature is not very moral, at least the distinction of the performers somewhat redeems the sloppiness of the pictures."
We argued for a good hour about this, but to no avail; once my uncle had spoken, it was all over, you might as well try to soften a menhir. My aunt Ludovic and Louis were left alone in Lorient. We have returned to Saint-Pierre..., from where I am writing to you.
XIX -- The worm alone and the other. -- The ordeal. -- The sea horse. -- Delivered!
My dear Mummy, I'm still laughing at what Berthe has just told us. Berthe likes to repeat what she hears.
So this morning my Aunt Ludovic was worried about Louis, whom she brought back unwell from Lorient. The poor boy looks very bad.
Gaston and I have said to each other several times: "It's the vermout".
Somehow Berthe caught on, and in conversation, my Aunt Ludovic, who has the funniest ideas, having said that she was afraid her son had tapeworm, Berthe exclaimed:
"Poor Louis! He's got two of them!
What do you mean, two! Nobody understood. They pressed her to explain, because she had a mysterious air about her.
Finally she said:
"The worm... on its own and the worm grinds."
Louis blushed and we struggled not to burst out laughing.
My uncle looked at the three of us in turn and diverted the conversation by saying to my aunt Ludovic:
"Pass Louis some lime blossom.
Louis is drinking linden at the moment, trying to digest Berthe's kind words. Gaston and I have carefully slipped away so as not to be taken as witnesses by the enfant terrible.
Tonight, a word before bed. I come out of my uncle's room. He questioned Gaston and me very seriously about how we spent our day in Lorient. He demanded the truth; we simply told him. He looked saddened and added: "My children, do you trust me?
Judge what we replied.
"Well, promise me to be docile even when you don't understand my orders." We promised to be docile.
And now, good evening, my mother: I agree with Gaston, my uncle is going to stage a coup.
We set up a saw for Louis, who has recovered and has been sulking since Lorient. At table, as soon as he drinks, we bow gravely Often even Gaston turns away from me and says in a half-voice:
"What a man! He knows how to drink.
My Aunt Ludovic, who senses our tug-of-war, is always scolding Gaston.
My Aunt Alphonse is so good that she would like to see us turn our left cheek when we are hit on the right. All Louis's bad temper falls on poor Marguerite. If you could hear the impertinence!
- Come over here. -- Bring me my folder. -- Go and get me a drink. -- Your hair looks ridiculous! -- You look like an idiot!
It's revolting.
Who's going to save us from this little gremlin?" shouted Gaston, raising his arms in desperation.
- Little what?" asked Berthe, who was putting Mignonnette in a bun.
- Little nothing," said Gaston, "nothing for you at least.
- Let's say little Cr...," I said, laughing, "Berthe the inquisitive one will be taken.
For the rest of the day we called Louis the little Cr... How he enraged us!
He got in the way of a lovely fishing trip and he looked at us so sarcastically that, if it hadn't been for Marguerite, we would have given him a hard time.
Marguerite always places herself like a shield between our fists and the illustrious back of the little crevice, and the latter, cowardly abusing our delicacy, shamelessly puts us to sleep.
We've only got a fortnight's holiday left and my uncle told us this morning, in all seriousness, that he was going to make us go back to school. Four hours of class a day! I can't believe it! I promised my uncle I'd obey him, and I will, but this is really upsetting me.
This is another of Berthe's practical jokes. Today she wanted us to explain who little Cr. was and what he meant.
"Look it up", we replied.
She looked it up and cried out:
"The little dunce!
We left, laughing out loud: her good word had avenged us of Louis' sullenness, which was becoming increasingly annoying and nervous.
We work hard. My uncle is not joking. Louis wanted to try this class, but his self-esteem suffered greatly from the very first lessons, because he is extremely ignorant. Under the pretext of illness, he spends our working hours alone with his mother. They are both extremely bored. My aunt starts talking about the tapeworm that is eating away at her son, reminding us of the dreaded sheep worm.
Mother, they're gone and I'm dancing for joy. My aunt suddenly remembered that she had a round of visits to make in the department, and she ran off with Louis, leaving us Marguerite, whom Berthe fought inch by inch. I am delighted to think that the little time we have to play will not be poisoned by the inconceivable whims and ridiculous demands of a poor boy who is already bored with himself.
Here I am again in front of my desk, where I've just put my books, notebooks and atlases, so as not to see them again until school starts.
When I entered the study room, I found my aunt and uncle waiting for me. Like me, Gaston was carrying his dictionary under his arm and he had his study face on like me.
My children," my uncle said with a smile, "go and bury all this in the depths of your drawers. You've learned to obey, so no more intellectual work, the rest of the holidays are yours."
With touching agreement, Gaston and I replied by throwing our dictionaries into the air.
You've understood me," added my uncle. I had only one way of getting your aunt and her son to leave politely, and that was to raise the spectre of study before Louis. He is ignorant, lazy and conceited, the method succeeded perfectly, and now I am giving my dear children their freedom and I want them to enjoy their last days of holiday to the full."
Judge how we thanked him; and with what haste we made all our schoolboy baggage disappear. My pen, I assure you, now works only for you, and I'm conscientiously building up my strength for next year's work. You know that I've turned my back on the lazy lady.
I've just brought home a sea horse. Don't worry, it has nothing to do with the monster that devoured Hippolytus and gave Racine the opportunity to write those beautiful verses that are singularly pleasing to schoolgirls:
"Barely had we left the gates of Trezene.
My sea horse has neither feet nor legs, and is scarcely longer than my finger. He's a perfectly funny animal. His head and neck are just like a horse's, and the rest of his body is like a little ringed skeleton, with a little mane floating around it.
I'm going to dry it and keep it carefully as one of my conquests; I looked for its scientific name and found Hippocampe.
My God, it's funny to see him stand up on his tail! If I had the time, I'd at least draw you his head, which is really that of a horse; but Gaston is waiting for me at the semaphore, which is rising like a rocket. We're having a wonderful time climbing up to the top of our building, where we can sit for two, and watching the waves pounding the foundations. Gaston is still working on the lighting system, and I have no idea how to cover my building. We've built the tower with pebbles, fragments of rock and stones that Neptune has carted away, but I can't find any material for the roof.
I don't think you have any ideas of this kind, my dear Mum, but if you see my uncle the architect, tell him about my problem. Here's the question reduced to its simplest expression: How do you cover a tower fifteen feet in circumference without slates, tiles or zinc? What a problem!
Mother, it's high tide and I'm writing to you perched on a large rock jutting out into the sea like a gigantic spur. I think the waves are going to splash me with foam soon, so I'm going to retreat to the shore. We've come here to admire the ocean's wrath as it enters the gulf. At this point, it encounters walls of rock on either side, which exasperates it. What I'm seeing is really very beautiful, Mum. There are opposing winds and currents, the sea is boiling, the waves are galloping in like fiery horses, rushing into the gulf and crashing against the rocks, covering them with magnificent cascades that sparkle in the sunlight for as long as you can see. How these waves foam! how they suddenly rise! how they make the boats and ships dance! Berthe was screaming with fear just now. Neptune happily points to the great black and green festoons running along the shore. They're ribbons of seaweed that the waves bring up in armfuls and that the locals come to pick up when the tide goes out.
- This stuff doesn't come from the shops," Neptune told me, "it comes straight from the good Lord.
I left the rocky point and joined the others on the shore. The dreadful noise had numbed our eardrums; we were all shouting like deaf people. I asked my uncle. -- What time is it?" in such a formidable voice and with such a look of bewilderment that everyone burst out laughing. Gaston, who is a sailor by vocation, started off only reluctantly, but Marguerite and Berthe couldn't take any more of the dreadful gurgling of the waves rushing under the rocks, and we made our way to the montagne de la Fée, on which rises a very beautiful galgal.
We all entered the underground passage, except for Berthe, who was frightened by the small iron door and ran away.
This cave isn't deep and isn't as deep as Gavr'inis. However, it is never without interest to revisit these old stones covered with mysterious signs that have covered the remains of great warriors. I was the first to leave the cave and join Berthe, who is nestling halfway up the galgal with Mignonnette. I finished these notes with her before going to start on the large and very appetising slice of bread that my aunt was showing me from afar. My aunt, seated at the foot of the galgal, has opened the sides of a large basket which is our very dear travelling companion and is cutting out everyone's share.
XX -- The accident. -- My secretary. -- My visits. -- Postscript.
Dear Mummy, don't worry in any way, but I am writing to you from my bed. A large stone rolled off the galgal and scratched my arm and shoulder. These scratches have given me a bit of a fever, so my aunt is forcing me to stay in the room. Everyone takes turns keeping me company, so I spend my time very pleasantly. We play cards, dominoes, lotto and tea; only Marguerite serves me herbal tea instead of wine. Berthe goes so far as to abandon Mignonnette to me, and this beautiful lady, sitting in her armchair, spreads her falbalas at the foot of my bed and looks at me with her pretty little enamel eyes.
Don't be surprised if you don't see Robert's handwriting, my dear aunt, I'm committing the indiscretion of writing in his diary. When I came to say hello to him, it was my shift, I saw him looking out of the corner of his eye at a little red notebook that follows him everywhere. I know that this notebook contains the diary that he writes to you, and I asked him if he had told anyone about his accident.
I've only said one word," he replied, "I'm in a great hurry, as I have to send these sheets off tomorrow.
So, half playing, half begging, I got permission to read this page. Once again I recognise the modesty of my good little cousin; but, since he tells the story of the galgal in this way, I will take the liberty of completing his account in his own notebook.
The day before yesterday, at the galgal, I was a bit agitated by the noise of the waves, and not remembering Dad's warning against walking or sitting on those dangerous rolling stones, I went and huddled in a hole with my doll Mignonnette, whose travel boots - she had walked a lot on the rocks - were worn out. Gaston and Piérik, who are always climbing somewhere, had climbed to the very top. Suddenly, I heard a loud shout from Mum, who was preparing our snack at the foot of the rocky mountain: I raised my head mechanically, a large stone was rolling right above me. Oh, how I was frightened, my dear aunt! I put both my arms in front of my face so that I couldn't see anything. I felt myself being pushed and I heard the big stone fall with a clatter. Then I looked and saw Robert lying on the ground. When he saw the stone coming towards me, he bravely jumped up, pushed it a little to the right, pushed me back to the left and fell all bruised.
Dad and Neptune took him down the mountain, Mum was sobbing and so was Marguerite. They say that nasty stone could have killed me. My poor Robert had bruises on his shoulder and arms. The doctor Gaston went to on horseback said it would be nothing.
We were very fond of Robert, who is so kind and so funny, but now, my dear aunt, we love him even more.
He can spend the afternoon on his balcony and see the sea, which he loves very much.
All the villagers come to ask about him, Piérik and Marianna catch him ducks, and Neptune shouts hello from his door in such a big voice that Robert can hear him very well from his bed. Neptune is very fond of his little brother Robert. If you'd seen him make a fist at the big rock that nearly killed us!
I don't know whether a diary page ends like a letter, my dear aunt; what is certain is that I end by kissing you for Robert and for myself.
Nothing has ever been hidden from you about my illness, dear Mama, and the proof is that I am writing to you on my return from an expedition to the Semaphore. During my enforced imprisonment I thought a lot about the famous roof I was looking for, and I found it by building houses of cards with Marguerite. I had Neptune bring me two very flat, very wide stones, and I placed them on my walls like playing cards. They support each other very well, and soon we'll be filling in the gaps with cement and stones. The main part of the roof is done, it's solid and not lacking in originality.
Don't worry, dear Mum, I haven't been ungrateful to the good families of the village. Gaston and I went to thank them for the interest they took in my health. I assure you that I love them all very much. Neptune was so heroic as to say that if I wanted a parrot broth, the cook should wring Ricoco's neck and pluck him. As for Piérik and Marianna, they didn't know what to do to distract me. As soon as I appeared on my balcony, they'd come running, and then I'd see a parade of superb teams of dunces. It's very amusing to see the poor dunces all pulling in different directions, the bigger ones knocking the smaller ones into the dust, and then knocked over in turn by others, who by chance are walking in the same direction, they wriggle around on the sand with their legs in the air, which is very funny. When I laugh at the comedies of the dunces, Piérik and Marianna seem satisfied.
I hope you'll allow me to do what my aunt allows Gaston to do, which is to let our little neighbours have my slightly worn-out clothes: shoes scorched by the sea, faded blouses, deformed hats. They'll make up a splendid wardrobe with these items, which are now worthless to us. Yesterday, my aunt gave us the most amusing performance. Piérik was dressed from head to toe in Gaston's garment. The poor little boy disappeared underneath, and yet he thought he was so handsome that he didn't dare lift the hat that fell over his nose. When he took his first steps, he lay flat on his back. He had forgotten that his trousers covered his feet. Marguerite and Berthe wanted to give Marianna their old dresses, but my aunt objected.
Don't take away her simplicity," she said, "all your thrift shops might make her lose it. I'd rather see her run barefoot than in old-fashioned boots, and her solid red slip is a hundred times more comfortable than your long skirts of light fabric.
Marguerite, who has a very good heart, did not feel beaten, she collected a small sum, and is busy making Marianna new clothes. I gave her the five francs I was going to spend on a new net. I'll use Gaston's net as, alas, the fishing season is drawing to a close. Fortunately, the end of fishing means my return to you.
I assure you, Mother, that we are enjoying our last days. By five o'clock we're on our feet. We quickly washed, prayed and had breakfast, and then set off, sometimes for one shore, sometimes for another, sometimes in a boat, sometimes on foot. Neptune never leaves us, and I now row as well as Gaston. My feet are as sure as his and my wrists almost as strong.
When my maid sees me doing my great maritime gymnastics, rowing, steering, climbing the rocks, going up to my room by my balcony like the late Griffart, running up the mast where Ricoco dreams of his country, she never fails to exclaim:
"Madame won't recognise him, that's for sure!"
I'm writing to you from Auray for the last time, dear Mum. We have said goodbye to Saint-Pierre, to its shores, its rocks, its sun, its dolmens, its menhirs and its inhabitants. Neptune kissed us all goodbye, and was more moved than the day I went to ask him to tell me about his shipwreck.
In Auray we met up again with my aunt Ludovic and the illustrious Louis, always bored, always sullen. Berthe made my aunt Ludovic promise that she would send Marguerite on the next holiday, which charmed Marguerite.
"As far as I'm concerned, I'm never setting foot again in that place, or in that stupid country," Louis told me.
May he be right, we won't run the risk of meeting him there again.
This evening everyone is coming to take me to the station, because alas, I'm leaving for Paris. No, but no, I'm leaving to find my beloved mother who, I hope, will only have to praise her son. The day after tomorrow, if you happen to be at the Gare Montparnasse at about four in the morning, and you see a tall Bahamian getting out of a second-class carriage, black as a Cafre, as thin as a nail, as light as a monkey, looking quite good-natured and followed by a good fat mother carrying an old basket on her arm, hurry, because this character will be your son, your Robert, who will be a thousand times happy to see you and to kiss you.
ROBERT.
P. S. You know I'll be getting prizes next year, and from now on the puddle philosopher will only haunt dunces on the shore.
