Part One
I -- In the village
I am a foundling.
But until I was eight, I thought I had a mother like all the other children, because when I cried, there was a woman who held me so gently in her arms, rocking me, that my tears stopped flowing.
I never lay in bed without a woman coming to kiss me, and when the December wind blew the snow against the white windows, she would take my feet between her two hands and warm them by singing me a song, the tune and some of the words of which I can still remember.
When I had a quarrel with one of my classmates, she would make me tell her about my sorrows, and almost always she would find good words to console me or vindicate me.
By all this and by many other things, by the way she spoke to me, by the way she looked at me, by her caresses, by the gentleness she put into her scolding, I believed she was my mother.
This is how I learned that she was only my wet nurse.
My village, or to put it more accurately, the village where I was brought up, for I had no village of my own, no place of birth, no more than I had a father and mother, the village where I spent my childhood is called Chavanon; it is one of the poorest in central France.
It owes this poverty not to the apathy or laziness of its inhabitants, but to its very location in a region of little fertility. The soil has no depth, and to produce good harvests it would need fertilisers or soil improvers, which are lacking in the country. As a result, there are (or at least there were at the time) very few cultivated fields.
The house where I spent my early years stands in a fold of land, on the banks of a stream that runs off into one of the tributaries of the Loire.
Until I was eight years old, I had never seen a man in this house; however, my mother was not a widow, but her husband, who was a stonemason like many other workers in the area, worked in Paris, and he had not returned to the country since I was old enough to see or understand my surroundings. Only from time to time did he send news through one of his comrades on his way back to the village.
"Mother Barberin, your man is well; he asked me to tell you that the work is going well, and to give you the money here; would you like to count it?
And that was all. Mother Barberin was content with this news: her man was in good health; the work was going well; he was earning a living.
The fact that Barberin had stayed in Paris for so long did not mean that he had a bad friendship with his wife. The disagreement had nothing to do with his absence. He stayed in Paris because work kept him there; that was all. When he was old, he would come back to live with his old wife, and with the money they had raised they would be safe from poverty for the time when age had robbed them of strength and health.
One day in November, as evening was falling, a man I didn't know stopped in front of our gate. I was on the threshold of the house, busy breaking a bourrée. Without pushing the gate, but lifting his head over it and looking at me, the man asked me if that wasn't where Mother Barberin lived.
I told him to come in.
At the sound of our voices, Mother Barberin came running and, as he crossed our threshold, she found herself face to face with him.
"I bring news from Paris", he said.
These were very simple words, which had already struck our ears more than once; but the tone in which they were pronounced bore no resemblance to that which once accompanied the words: "Your man is well, the work is going well".
Oh, my God!" cried Mère Barberin, clasping her hands together, "something terrible has happened to Jérôme!
- Well, yes, but you mustn't be frightened sick; your man has been hurt, that's the truth; he's just not dead. But he may be crippled. For the moment he's in hospital. I was his bedmate, and as I was on my way home, he asked me to tell you in passing.
Mother Barberin, who wanted to know more, asked the man to stay for supper.
He sat down in the corner of the fireplace and, as he ate, told us how the misfortune had happened: Barberin had been half crushed by some scaffolding that had fallen down, and as it had been proved that he should not have been in the place where he had been injured, the contractor refused to pay him any compensation.
However," he says, finishing his story, "I advised him to sue the contractor.
- A lawsuit costs a lot of money.
- Yes, but when you win it!
Mother Barberin would have liked to go to Paris, but such a long and costly journey was a terrible business.
The next morning, we went down to the village to see the priest. He didn't want to let her go without first finding out whether she could be of use to her husband. He wrote to the chaplain at the hospital where Barberin was being treated, and a few days later he received a reply saying that Mother Barberin should not set off, but that she should send her husband a certain sum of money because he was going to sue the contractor where he had been injured.
Days and weeks went by, and letters arrived from time to time, all asking for more money; the last one, more urgent than the others, said that if there was no more money, they would have to sell the cow to get some.
Only those who have lived in the countryside with peasants know what distress and pain there is in these three words: "sell the cow".
For the naturalist, the cow is a ruminant animal; for the walker, it is an animal that looks good in the landscape when it raises its dew-dampened black muzzle above the grass; for the city boy, it is the source of café au lait and cream cheese; but for the peasant, it is much more and even better. However poor he may be and however large his family, he is guaranteed not to go hungry as long as there is a cow in his stable. With a tether or even with a simple hart tied around the horns, a child walks the cow along the grassy paths, where the pasture belongs to no one, and in the evening the whole family has butter in its soup and milk to wet its potatoes; father, mother, children, young and old, everyone lives off the cow.
Mother Barberin and I lived so well off ours that until then I had hardly ever eaten meat. But she wasn't just our nurse, she was also our comrade, our friend, because you mustn't imagine that the cow is a stupid animal, on the contrary it's full of intelligence and moral qualities that are all the more developed the more you have cultivated them through education. We stroked our cow, we talked to her, she understood us, and for her part, with her big round eyes full of gentleness, she knew very well how to make us understand what she wanted or what she felt.
At last we loved her and she loved us, which is saying a lot.
However, we had to part with her, because it was only by 'selling the cow' that we could satisfy Barberin.
A merchant came to the house and, after examining Roussette carefully, after saying over and over again that she didn't suit him at all, that she was a poor people's cow that he couldn't resell, that she had no milk, that she made bad butter, he finally said he would take her, but only out of the goodness of his heart and to oblige Mother Barberin, who was a good woman.
Poor Roussette, as if she understood what was happening, refused to come out of her stable and started mooing.
Go round the back and chase her away", said the merchant, handing me the whip he was carrying round his neck.
- Not for that," said Mother Barberin.
And, taking the cow by the tether, she spoke softly to her.
"Come on, sweetheart, come on, come on".
When we reached the road, the merchant tied her up behind his carriage, and she had to follow the horse.
We returned to the house. But for a long time to come, we heard her bellowing.
No more milk, no more butter. In the morning a piece of bread; in the evening potatoes with salt.
Shrove Tuesday arrived shortly after the sale of Roussette; the previous year, for Shrove Tuesday, Mother Barberin had made me a feast of pancakes and doughnuts, and I had eaten so many of them that she had been very happy.
But then we had Roussette, who gave us the milk to thin the batter and the butter to put in the pan.
No more Roussette, no more milk, no more butter, no more mardi gras; that's what I said to myself sadly.
But Mother Barberin had given me a surprise; although she wasn't a borrower, she had asked one of our neighbours for a cup of milk and another for a lump of butter, and when I got home around midday I found her pouring flour into a large earthen pan.
What do you do with flour?" she said, looking at me.
- Bread.
- And what else?
- Porridge.
- And what else?
- Well... Well, I don't know.
- Yes, you do. But, being a good little boy, you don't dare say it. You know that today is Shrove Tuesday, the day of pancakes and doughnuts. But you also know that we have no butter or milk, so you don't dare mention it. Is that really true?
- Oh, Mother Barberin.
- Give me the eggs," she said, "and while I'm breaking them, peel the apples.
While I was cutting the apples into slices, she cracked the eggs into the flour and began to beat the mixture, pouring a spoonful of milk over it from time to time.
When the batter was smooth, Mother Barberin put the bowl on the hot ashes, and all we had to do was wait until evening, as we were to eat the pancakes and doughnuts at our supper.
Casse de la bourrée", she said to me, "we need a good, clear, smokeless fire".
So Mother Barberin unhooked the frying pan from the wall and put it over the flame.
"Give me the butter.
She took a piece as big as a small walnut from the end of her knife and put it in the frying pan, where it melted and sizzled.
Ah, that really was a lovely smell, which tickled our palates all the more pleasantly because we hadn't breathed it in for a long time.
It was also joyful music, the music produced by the sizzling and whistling of the butter.
However, no matter how attentive I was to the music, I thought I heard footsteps in the courtyard.
Who could have come to disturb us at this hour? A neighbour, no doubt, asking for a light.
But I didn't dwell on this idea, because Mother Barberin, who had dipped the spoon into the terrine, had just poured a layer of white pastry into the frying pan, and this was no time to be distracted.
A stick hit the threshold, and then the door swung open.
"Who's there?" asked Mother Barberin without turning round.
A man had entered, and the flame that lit him up showed me that he was dressed in a white smock and holding a large stick in his hand.
"Are we having a party here? Don't be shy," he said gruffly.
- Oh my God!" cried Mère Barberin, putting her frying pan down quickly, "is that you, Jérôme?
Then she took me by the arm and pushed me towards the man who had stopped on the threshold:
"It's your father.
II -- A foster father
I went over to kiss him back, but he stopped me with the end of his stick:
"What's that one?
- It's Rémi.
- You told me...
- Well, yes, but... it wasn't true, because...
- Ah, not true, not true.
He took a few steps towards me, his stick raised, and I instinctively stepped back.
What had I done? What was I guilty of? Why did he welcome me when I went to kiss him?
I didn't have time to consider these various questions, which were pressing on my troubled mind.
I see you were having Mardi Gras," he said; "that's good, because I'm really hungry. What have you got for supper?
- I was making pancakes.
- I can see that; but you're not going to feed pancakes to a man with ten leagues in his legs.
- I've got nothing; we weren't expecting you.
- What do you mean, nothing? Nothing for supper?
He looked around.
"Here's some butter.
He looked up at the ceiling where the bacon used to hang; but the hook had long since been empty, and only a few gobs of garlic and onion now hung from the beam.
Here's some onion," he said, dropping a gleaning with his stick; "four or five onions, a lump of butter, and we'll have a good soup. Take off your pancake and fry the onions in the pan.
Take the pancake out of the frying pan! Mother Barberin said nothing. On the contrary, she hastened to do her man's bidding, while he sat down on the bench in the corner of the fireplace.
I didn't dare leave the place where the stick had brought me, and leaning against the table, I looked at him.
He was a man of about fifty, with a rough face and a hard look; his head was tilted on his right shoulder as a result of the wound he had received, and this deformity contributed to making his appearance not very reassuring.
Mother Barberin had put the frying pan back on the fire.
"Are you going to use this little piece of butter to make us soup?" he said.
Then, taking the plate containing the butter himself, he dropped the whole lump into the pan.
No more butter, no more pancakes.
At any other time, I would certainly have been deeply moved by this catastrophe, but I was no longer thinking about the pancakes or the doughnuts, and the thought that occupied my mind was that this man who seemed so hard was my father.
"My father, my father! That was the word I kept repeating to myself.
I had never asked myself exactly what a father was, and vaguely, instinctively, I had thought it was a mother with a big voice; but as I looked at the man who was falling from the sky, I felt a painful fright.
Instead of standing still as if you were frozen," he said, "put the plates on the table.
I hastened to obey. The soup was ready. Mother Barberin served it on the plates.
I was so troubled, so worried, that I couldn't eat, and I looked at him too, but on the sly, lowering my eyes when I met his.
So you're not hungry?" he said.
- He said, "No, I'm not.
- Well, go to bed and try to get some sleep, otherwise I'll get angry.
As is the case in many peasant houses, our kitchen was also our bedroom. Next to the fireplace was everything used for eating, the table, the hutch, the sideboard; at the other end was the furniture for sleeping; in one corner was mother Barberin's bed, in the opposite corner mine, which was in a sort of cupboard surrounded by a red cloth mantling.
I hurried to undress and go to bed. But sleeping was another matter.
You don't sleep because you want to; you sleep because you're sleepy and quiet.
But I wasn't sleepy and I wasn't quiet. After a while, I don't know how long, I heard someone approaching my bed.
"Are you asleep?" asked a muffled voice.
I didn't reply, because the terrible words "I'm getting angry" were still ringing in my ears.
He's asleep," said Mother Barberin; "as soon as he's in bed, he's asleep, that's his habit; you can talk without fearing he'll hear you.
No doubt I should have said I wasn't sleeping, but I didn't dare; I had been ordered to sleep, I wasn't sleeping, I was at fault.
What about your trial?" asked Mère Barberin.
- It's lost! The judges decided that I was at fault for being under the scaffolding and that the contractor owed me nothing.
With that he banged his fist on the table and started swearing without saying anything sensible.
The lawsuit's lost," he soon continued, "our money's lost, crippled, misery; that's it! And as if that wasn't enough, when I come back here I find a child. Will you explain to me why you didn't do what I told you to do?
- Because I couldn't.
- You couldn't take him to the Foundling?
- You don't just abandon a child you've nursed and loved.
- It wasn't your child.
- I wanted to do what you asked, but he fell ill.
- Sick?
- Yes, ill; it wasn't the time, was it, to take him to the hospice and kill him.
- And when he recovered?
- Well, he wasn't cured immediately. After this illness came another: he coughed, the poor little thing, heartbreakingly. That's how our little Nicolas died; it seemed to me that if I took that one to town, he'd die too.
- But then what happened?
- Time marched on. If I'd waited that long, I could have waited some more.
- How old is he now?
- Eight.
- Well, at eight he'll be going where he should have gone before, and it won't be any nicer for him; that's what he'll have gained.
- Ah, Jérôme, you won't do that.
- I won't do that! And who's going to stop me? Do you think we can keep him forever?
There was a moment's silence and I was able to breathe; the emotion had gripped my throat to the point of suffocation.
Soon Mother Barberin resumed:
"Ah, how Paris has changed you! You wouldn't have spoken like that before going to Paris.
- Perhaps I wouldn't have. But what's certain is that, if Paris changed me, it also crippled me. How do you make a living now, yours, mine? We have no more money. The cow is sold. When we don't have enough to eat, do we have to feed a child that isn't ours?
- It's mine.
- It's not yours any more than it's mine. He's not a farmer's child. I looked at him during supper: he's delicate, skinny, no arms, no legs.
- He's the prettiest child in the country.
- Pretty, I wouldn't say. But solid! Will it be his kindness that gives him food? Can you be a worker with shoulders like his? We're city kids, and we don't need city kids here.
- I'm telling you, he's a good kid, and he's got a mind like a cat, and a good heart too. He'll work for us.
- In the meantime, we'll have to work for him, and I can't work any more.
- And if his parents ask for him, what will you say?
- His parents! Does he have parents? If he did, they would have looked for him, and for the last eight years, they've certainly found him. Ah, I made a great mistake in believing that he had parents who would one day claim him and pay us for our trouble in bringing him up. I was nothing but a simpleton and a fool. Just because he was wrapped in beautiful lace swaddling clothes didn't mean that his parents would come looking for him. They might even be dead."
The door opened and closed again. He had gone.
Then, straightening up quickly, I called out to Mother Barberin.
"Oh, Mummy!
She ran over to my bed:
"You weren't asleep, were you?
- It's not my fault.
- I'm not scolding you, so you heard everything Jerome said?
- Yes, you're not my mother, but he's not my father.
I didn't say these words in the same tone of voice, because if I was sorry to learn that she wasn't my mother, I was happy, almost proud, to know that he wasn't my father. Hence a contradiction in my feelings which was reflected in my voice.
But Mother Barberin didn't seem to mind.
Perhaps," she said, "I should have told you the truth; but you were so much my child that I couldn't tell you, without reason, that I wasn't your real mother! Your mother, poor boy, as you've heard, we don't know her. Is she alive or not? We don't know. One morning in Paris, as Jérôme was on his way to work and passing along a wide, tree-lined street called Avenue de Breteuil, he heard the cries of a child. They seemed to be coming from a garden doorway. It was February; it was daybreak. He approached the door and saw a child lying on the threshold. As he looked around to call someone, he saw a man emerge from behind a large tree and run off. This man had undoubtedly hidden there to see if the child he had placed in the doorway could be found. This left Jérôme in a quandary, for the child was screaming at the top of his voice, as if he had realised that help had arrived and that he must not be allowed to escape. While Jérôme was thinking about what to do, he was joined by other workers, and it was decided that the child should be taken to the police commissioner. He wouldn't stop screaming. No doubt he was suffering from the cold. But as it was very hot in the commissioner's office, and the cries continued, it was thought that he was suffering from hunger, and they went to find a neighbour who would be willing to breast-feed him. He threw himself on it. He was truly starving. So they undressed him in front of the fire. He was a handsome boy, five or six months old, pink, fat, gorgeous; the swaddling clothes and linen he was wrapped in clearly showed that he belonged to rich parents. It was therefore a child who had been stolen and then abandoned. At least that's what the superintendent explained. What was to be done with him? After writing down everything Jérôme knew, including a description of the child and his unmarked nappies, the superintendent said he was going to send him to the Foundling Home, if none of the people there wanted to take him in; he was a handsome, healthy, strong child who would not be difficult to bring up; his parents, who would of course go and get him, would generously reward those who took care of him. With that in mind, Jérôme came forward and said he'd be happy to take care of it, and they gave it to him. I had a child of the same age, but it was no big deal for me to feed two of them. That's how I became your mother.
- Oh, Mum.
- After three months, I lost my child, and then I became even more attached to you. I forgot that you weren't really our son. Unfortunately Jérôme didn't forget, and seeing that after three years your parents hadn't looked for you, or at least hadn't found you, he wanted to put you in a hospice. You've heard why I didn't obey him.
- Oh, not the hospice," I cried, clinging to her; "Mother Barberin, not the hospice, please!
- You won't go, but on one condition, that you go to sleep straight away. He mustn't find you awake when he comes home.
And after kissing me, she turned my nose against the wall. I would have liked to fall asleep, but I had been too badly shaken, too deeply moved to find peace and sleep at will.
There were two children in the village who were called "the children of the hospice"; they had a lead plate around their necks with a number on it; they were badly dressed and dirty; they were mocked and beaten. The other children were mean enough to chase them, just as you would chase a lost dog for fun, and also because a lost dog has no one to defend it.
Oh, I didn't want to be like those children; I didn't want to have a number round my neck, I didn't want people running after me shouting: "To the hospice! To the hospice!
That thought alone made me feel cold and made my teeth chatter.
And I couldn't sleep. And Barberin was about to return.
Fortunately he did not return as soon as he had said, and I fell asleep before he did.
III -- Signor Vitalis' troupe
No doubt I slept all night under the impression of grief and fear, for the next morning when I awoke my first movement was to feel my bed and look around me, to be sure that I had not been carried away.
Throughout the morning, Barberin said nothing to me, and I began to think that the plan to send me to the hospice had been abandoned. No doubt Mother Barberin had spoken; she had decided to keep me.
But as noon struck, Barberin told me to put on my cap and follow him.
Frightened, I turned my eyes to Mother Barberin to beg for help. But, on the sly, she gave me a sign that I should obey; at the same time, a movement of her hand reassured me that there was nothing to fear.
So, without replying, I set off behind Barberin.
It's a long way from our house to the village; it's a good hour's walk. That hour passed without him saying a word to me. He walked ahead, slowly, hobbling along, without his head making a single movement, and from time to time he would turn round to see if I was following him.
As we passed the café, a man on the threshold called Barberin and asked him to come in.
Barberin took me by the ear and led me past him, and when we entered he closed the door.
While Barberin sat down at a table with the café owner who had invited him in, I went and sat by the fireplace and looked around.
In the corner opposite to the one I was sitting in was a tall old man with a white beard, wearing a strange costume the like of which I had never seen before.
On top of his hair, which fell in long locks over his shoulders, was a high grey felt hat decorated with green and red feathers. A sheepskin, the wool of which was on the inside, hugged his waist. This sheepskin had no sleeves, and through two open holes in the shoulders protruded his arms, which were clad in a velvet fabric that must once have been* *blue.
He was lying back in his chair, his chin resting on his right hand; his elbow was resting on his bent knee.
I had never seen a living person in such a calm attitude; he looked like one of the wooden saints in our church.
Next to him, three dogs, tucked under his chair, were warming themselves without moving: a white poodle, a black barbet, and a small grey bitch with a smart and gentle face; the poodle was wearing an old police cap held under his chin by a leather strap.
While I was looking at the old man with astonished curiosity, Barberin and the owner of the café were chatting in hushed tones, and I could hear that they were talking about me.
Barberin said that he had come to the village to take me to the mayor, so that the mayor could ask the hospices to pay him a pension to keep me.
So that was what Mother Barberin had been able to get from her husband, and I realised straight away that if Barberin found it to his advantage to keep me close to him, I had nothing more to fear.
The old man, without seeming to be, was also listening to what was being said; suddenly he stretched out his right hand towards me and, addressing Barberin, said:
Is that child bothering you?" he said in a foreign accent.
- He was.
- And you think the hospice administration in your department is going to pay you for months of childminding?
- Since he has no parents and is dependent on me, someone has to pay for him.
- I'm not saying no, but do you think that everything that is fair can always be done?
- Not for that.
- Well, I don't think you'll ever get the pension you're asking for.
- Then he'll go to the hospice; there's no law forcing me to keep him in my house if I don't want him there.
- When you agreed to take him in, that was an undertaking to keep him.
- Well, I won't keep him, and when I have to put him on the street, I'll get rid of him.
- There might be a way of getting rid of it straight away," said the old man after a moment's reflection, "and even of gaining something from it.
- If you give me that option, I'll buy you a bottle, and willingly too.
- Order the bottle and your business is done.
- Surely?
- Surely.
The old man left his chair and sat down opposite Barberin. Strangely enough, as he stood up, his sheepskin was lifted by a movement I couldn't explain; it was as if he had a dog in his left arm.
What was he going to say? What was going to happen?
I had followed him with cruel emotion.
What you want," he said, "is for this child not to eat your bread any longer, or if he continues to eat it, to be paid?
- Right; because...
- Oh, the reason, you know, it's none of my business, so I don't need to know; it's enough for me to know that you don't want the child any more; if that's the case, give him to me, I'll take care of it.
- Give him to you!
- Don't you want to get rid of him?
- Give you a child like that, such a beautiful child, for he is a beautiful child, look at him.
- I have looked at him.
- Rémi! come here.
I approached the table trembling.
Don't be afraid, little one," said the old man.
- Look," continued Barberin.
- I'm not saying he's a naughty child. If he was a naughty child, I wouldn't want him; monsters aren't my business.
- He's good to work with.
- He's very weak.
- He's as strong as a man and strong and healthy; look at his legs, have you ever seen straighter ones?
Barberin pulled up my trousers.
Too thin," said the old man.
- And his arms?" continued Barberin.
- Arms are like legs; they can go, but they can't withstand fatigue and misery.
- But feel for yourself, see, feel for yourself.
The old man ran his gaunt hand over my legs, feeling them, shaking his head and pouting.
I had already witnessed a similar scene when the trader came to buy our cow. He too had felt and felt her. He too had shaken his head and pouted: it wasn't a good cow, he wouldn't be able to sell it, and yet he had bought it and taken it away.
Was the old man going to buy me and take me away? ah! mère Barberin, mère Barberin!
Unfortunately she wasn't there to defend me.
At last," said the old man, "as it is, I'll take it. Only, of course, I'm not buying it from you, I'm renting it. I'll give you twenty francs a year.
- Twenty francs!
- That's a good price and I'll pay in advance; you'll get four nice pennies and you'll be rid of the child.
He rummaged in his pocket and pulled out a leather purse from which he took four silver coins which he spread out on the table, making them ring.
Just think," exclaimed Barberin, "this child will have parents one day or another!
- What does that matter?
- If I hadn't counted on that, I would never have taken him on.
Barberin's words, "If I hadn't counted on his parents, I would never have taken him on," made me hate him even more. What a wicked man!
And it's because you no longer count on his parents," said the old man, "that you're throwing him out. Who will they turn to, these parents, if they ever appear? To you, won't they, and not to me, whom they don't know?
- And what if it's you who finds them?
- So let's agree that, if he has parents one day, we'll share the profit, and I'll put in thirty francs.
- Put in forty.
- No; for the services he will render me, that's not possible.
- And what services would you like him to render you? For good legs, he has good legs; for good arms, he has good arms; I stand by what I said, but what do you think he's good for?
The old man looked at Barberin sardonically and, emptying his glass slowly, said:
To keep me company," he said; "I'm getting old and sometimes in the evening, after a tiring day, when the weather is bad, I have sad thoughts; it will distract me.
- He's sure that his legs will be strong enough for that.
- But not too strong, because he'll have to dance, and then jump, and then walk, and then, after walking, jump again; finally he'll take his place in Signor Vitalis's troupe.
- And where is your troupe?
- Signor Vitalis is me, as you may have guessed, and I'll show you the troupe, since you want to meet them.
As he said this, he opened his sheepskin and took in his hand a strange animal which he held under his left arm clutched to his chest.
I couldn't think of a name for this strange creature, which I was seeing for the first time, and which I looked at with amazement.
She was dressed in a red blouse edged with gold braid; but her arms and legs were bare, for it was arms and legs that she had, not legs; only these arms and legs were covered with black skin, not white or cameo.
"The ugly monkey!" cried Barberin.
This word drew me out of my astonishment, for if I had never seen monkeys, I had at least heard of them; so it was not a black child I had before me, it was a monkey.
Here is the first member of my troupe," said Vitalis, "Mr Joli-Coeur. Joli-Cœur, my friend, greet the company."
Joli-Cœur raised his closed hand to his lips and blew us all a kiss.
Now," continued Vitalis, extending his hand towards the white poodle, "to another; Signor Capi will have the honour of introducing his friends to the esteemed company present.
At this command the poodle, which until then had not made the slightest movement, rose briskly to his feet and, standing on his hind legs, crossed his two front paws over his chest, then saluted his master so low that his police cap touched the ground.
This duty of politeness accomplished, he turned towards his comrades, and with one paw, while still holding the other on his chest, he beckoned them to approach.
The two dogs, who had their eyes fixed on their comrade, immediately stood up, and, each giving a front paw, as one gives the hand in the world, they gravely took six steps forward, then after three steps back, and greeted the company.
The one I call Capi," continued Vitalis, otherwise known as Capitano in Italian, "is the leader of the dogs; it is he who, as the most intelligent, transmits my orders. This elegant young black-haired man is Signor Zerbino, which means "the gallant", a name he deserves in every respect. As for this modest-looking young person, she is signora Dolce, a charming Englishwoman who has not stolen her name of sweet. It is with these remarkable subjects in different capacities that I have the advantage of travelling the world, earning my living more or less well, according to the fortunes of good or bad fortune. Capi!"
The poodle crossed his legs.
"Capi, come here, my friend, and be so kind as to tell this young boy, who is looking at you with eyes as round as marbles, what time it is.
Capi uncrossed his paws, approached his master, pulled aside the sheepskin, rummaged in his waistcoat pocket, pulled out a large silver watch, looked at the dial and barked twice distinctly; then after these two well-accentuated barks, in a loud, clear voice, he let out three more faint ones.
It was indeed three quarters past two.
Good," said Vitalis, "I thank you, Signor Capi; and now I beg you to invite Signora Dolce to give us the pleasure of dancing a little on the rope."
Capi immediately reached into his master's jacket pocket and pulled out a rope. He made a sign to Zerbino, and Zerbino hurried over to him. Capi then threw him a piece of the rope, and the two of them began to turn it.
When the movement was regular, Dolce dashed into the circle and jumped slightly, holding his beautiful, tender eyes on his master's eyes.
You can see," said his teacher, "that my pupils are intelligent; but intelligence can only be fully appreciated by comparison. That's why I'm taking this boy into my troupe; he'll play the part of a beast, and the spirit of my pupils will be all the better for it.
- Oh! to play a beast..." interrupted Barberin.
- You have to have wit," continued Vitalis, "and I don't think this boy will lack it once he's had a few lessons. As for the rest, we'll see. And for a start we'll have immediate proof. If he's intelligent, he'll understand that with Signor Vitalis you have the chance to go for walks, to travel all over France and ten other countries, to lead a free life instead of staying behind oxen, walking every day in the same field, from morning to night, whereas, if he's not intelligent, he'll cry, he'll shout, and, as Signor Vitalis doesn't like naughty children, he won't take him with him. So the naughty child will go to the hospice, where you have to work hard and eat little.
I was intelligent enough to understand these words, but there was a terrible distance between understanding and execution.
Signor Vitalis's pupils were certainly very funny and amusing, and it must also have been great fun to go for walks all the time; but to follow them and go for walks with them, you had to leave Mother Barberin.
It's true that, if I refused, I might not stay with Mother Barberin; they'd send me to the hospice.
As I remained troubled, with tears in my eyes, Vitalis gently struck me on the cheek with the tip of his finger.
Come on," he said, "the child understands, since he doesn't cry out; reason will enter this little head, and tomorrow...
- Oh, sir," I cried, "leave me to Mummy Barberin, please!
But before I could say more I was interrupted by a tremendous bark from Capi.
At the same time, the dog ran towards the table where Joli-Coeur was sitting.
Joli-Cœur, taking advantage of a moment when everyone was turned towards me, had gently taken his master's glass, which was full of wine, and was in the process of emptying it. But Capi, who was on guard, had seen the monkey's mischief and, being the faithful servant that he was, tried to stop him.
"Go and stand over there, in the corner, with your nose against the wall, and you, Zerbino, stand guard in front of him; if he moves, give him a good slap. As for you, Mr Capi, you're a good dog; give me your paw so I can shake it.
While the monkey obeyed, uttering little muffled cries, the dog, happy and proud, held out his paw to his master.
Now," continued Vitalis, "let's get back to business. I'll give you thirty francs.
- No, forty.
A discussion began, but Vitalis soon interrupted:
This child must be bored here," he said, "so let him go for a walk in the courtyard of the inn and have some fun.
At the same time he made a sign to Barberin.
Yes, that's it," said Barberin, "go into the courtyard, but don't move until I call you, or I'll get angry.
All I had to do was obey, which I did.
So I went into the courtyard, but I wasn't in the mood for fun. I sat down on a stone and thought for a while.
It was my fate that was being decided at this very moment. What would it be? The cold and anxiety made me shiver.
The discussion between Vitalis and Barberin lasted a long time, for more than an hour passed before Barberin came into the courtyard.
At last I saw him appear; he was alone. Had he come to fetch me and hand me over to Vitalis?
Come on," he said, "let's go home.
Home! So I wouldn't leave Mother Barberin?
I would have liked to question him, but I didn't dare, for he seemed in a very bad mood.
The journey was silent.
But about ten minutes before we got there, Barberin, who was walking ahead, stopped:
You know," he said, taking me roughly by the ear, "that if you say a single word about what you have heard today, you will pay dearly for it; so be careful!
IV -- Mother's house
Well," asked Mother Barberin when we returned, "what did the mayor say?
- We haven't seen him.
- You haven't seen him?
- No, I met some friends at the Café Notre-Dame and when we went out it was too late; we'll go back tomorrow.
So Barberin had decided to abandon his deal with the man with the dogs.
On the way I had wondered more than once if there wasn't a ruse in this return to the house; but these last words dispelled the doubts that were confusedly stirring in my troubled mind. Since we had to return to the village the next day to see the mayor, it was certain that Barberin had not accepted Vitalis' proposals.
However, despite his threats, I would have spoken to Mother Barberin about my doubts if I could have been alone with her for a moment; but Barberin did not leave the house all evening, and I went to bed without finding the opportunity I had been waiting for.
I went to sleep thinking that it would be the next day.
But the next day, when I got up, I didn't see Mother Barberin.
"Mum?
- She's in the village and won't be back until after midday.
Without knowing why, this absence worried me. She hadn't said the day before that she was going to the village. Why hadn't she waited to come with us, since we were going after midday? Would she be back when we left?
A vague fear gripped my heart; without realising the danger that threatened me, I nevertheless had a premonition of danger.
Barberin was looking at me with a strange expression that did little to reassure me.
Wanting to escape this look, I went into the garden.
This garden, which wasn't very big, was of considerable value to us, for it fed us, providing us, with the exception of wheat, with almost everything we ate: potatoes, beans, cabbage, carrots, turnips. So there was no wasted land. However, Mother Barberin had given me a small corner in which I had gathered together an infinite number of plants, grasses and mosses plucked in the morning from the edge of the woods or along the hedges while I was looking after our cow, and replanted in the afternoon in my garden, haphazardly, one beside the other.
To be sure, it wasn't a beautiful garden with well-sanded paths and neatly divided flowerbeds full of rare flowers; people passing along the path didn't stop to look at it over the chiselled thorn hedge, but as it was, it had the merit and charm of belonging to me. It was my thing, my property, my work; I arranged it as I liked, according to my whim of the moment, and when I spoke about it, which happened to me twenty times a day, I said 'my garden'.
I was on both knees on the ground, leaning on my hands, my nose buried in my Jerusalem artichokes, when I heard an impatient voice calling out my name. It was Barberin calling me.
What did he want with me?
I hurried home.
What a surprise to see Vitalis and his dogs in front of the fireplace!
I instantly understood what Barberin wanted from me.
Vitalis was coming to get me, and it was so that Mother Barberin wouldn't be able to defend me that Barberin had sent her to the village that morning.
Feeling that I had neither help nor pity to expect from Barberin, I ran to Vitalis:
Oh sir," I cried, "please don't take me away.
And I burst into tears.
Come on, my boy," he said quite gently, "you won't be unhappy with me; I don't beat children, and you'll have the company of my pupils, who are great fun. What do you have to regret?
- Mother Barberin! Mother Barberin!
- In any case, you won't be staying here," said Barberin, grabbing me roughly by the ear.
- No! Mother Barberin!
- Ah, you bore me in the end," exclaimed Barberin, who flew into a terrible rage; "if I have to chase you out of here with a stick, that's what I'll do.
- This child misses his mother Barberin," said Vitalis; "you mustn't beat him for that; he has a good heart and that's a good sign.
- If you pity him, he'll scream louder.
- Now to business.
Saying this, Vitalis spread eight five-franc coins on the table, which Barberin, in a flash, made disappear into his pocket.
Where's the package?" asked Vitalis.
- Here it is," replied Barberin, pointing to a blue cotton handkerchief tied at the four corners.
Vitalis untied the knots and looked at what was in the handkerchief; it contained two of my shirts and a pair of canvas trousers.
This is not what we agreed," said Vitalis; "you were supposed to give me his things and all I find here are rags.
- He has no other clothes.
- If I asked the child, I'm sure he'd say it wasn't true. But I don't want to argue about it. I haven't got the time. We have to get going. Come on, little one. What's his name?
- Rémi.
- Come on, Rémi, take your parcel and pass in front of Capi.
I held out my hands to him, then to Barberin; but they both turned their heads away, and I felt Vitalis grab me by the wrist.
I had to walk.
Ah, the poor house, it seemed to me, as I crossed the threshold, that I was leaving a piece of my skin behind.
I looked around quickly, my eyes clouded with tears, but there was no one to turn to for help: no one on the road, no one in the surrounding meadows.
I began to call out:
"Mother! Mother Barberin!
But no one answered my voice, which died away in a sob.
We had to follow Vitalis, who hadn't let go of my wrist.
"Bon voyage!" shouted Barberin.
And he went back into the house.
Alas! it was all over.
"Come on, Rémi, let's walk, my child," said Vitalis.
And his hand pulled my arm. So I started walking beside him. Fortunately he didn't hurry his pace, and I think he even matched mine.
The path we followed wound its way up the mountain, and at every turn I could see Mother Barberin's house getting smaller and smaller. I had walked this way many times before, and I knew that when we reached the last bend I would see the house once more, and that as soon as we had taken a few steps onto the plateau, it would be over; nothing more; before me the unknown; behind me the house where I had lived until that happy day, and which I would probably never see again.
Fortunately, it was a long way up, but we kept walking until we reached the top.
Vitalis hadn't let go of my wrist.
"Will you let me rest a little?
- Gladly, my boy".
And, for the first time, he loosened his grip.
But at the same time I saw his gaze go to Capi and make a sign that Capi understood. Immediately, like a sheepdog, Capi abandoned the head of the troop and came to stand behind me.
This manoeuvre made me realise what the sign had already told me: Capi was my guardian; if I made a move to save myself, he would jump at my legs.
I went and sat down on the grassy parapet and Capi followed close behind.
Sitting on the parapet, I looked for Mother Barberin's house with my tear-dimmed eyes.
Below us, the valley we had just climbed descended, cut through by meadows and woods, and at the very bottom stood the mother's house, the one where I had been brought up.
It was all the easier to find in the midst of the trees because at that very moment a small column of yellow smoke was rising from its chimney, rising straight up into the still air and reaching us.
Whether it was an illusion of memory or reality, this smoke brought me the smell of oak leaves that had dried around the branches of the logs with which we had built a fire all winter; it seemed to me that I was still sitting by the fireplace, on my little bench, my feet in the ashes, when the wind rushing up the chimney blew the smoke in our faces.
Despite the distance and the height from which we were standing, things had retained their sharp, distinct forms, only diminished.
One more step along the road and it would all disappear forever.
Suddenly, on the path leading from the village up to the house, I saw a white hat in the distance. It disappeared behind a group of trees and soon reappeared again.
The distance was so great that I could only make out the whiteness of the headdress, which, like a pale-coloured spring butterfly, fluttered between the branches.
But there are moments when the heart sees better and further than the most piercing eyes: I recognised Mother Barberin; it was her; I was sure of it; I felt it was her.
Well?" asked Vitalis, "shall we set off?
- Oh, sir, please...
- It's not true what they said, you've got no legs; for so little, you're already tired; that doesn't promise us good days.
But I didn't answer, I just looked.
It was Mother Barberin; it was her headdress, it was her blue petticoat, it was her.
She walked briskly, as if in a hurry to get home.
When she reached our gate, she pushed it open and entered the courtyard, which she crossed quickly.
I immediately stood up on the parapet, without thinking about Capi, who jumped up beside me.
Mother Barberin didn't stay in the house long. She came out and started running up and down the courtyard with her arms outstretched.
She was looking for me.
I leaned forward and shouted at the top of my voice:
"Mummy! Mummy!
But my voice couldn't come down, nor could it overcome the murmur of the stream, it was lost in the air.
What's the matter?" asked Vitalis, "have you gone mad?
Without answering, I kept my eyes fixed on Mother Barberin; but she didn't know I was so close to her and she didn't think of raising her head.
She had crossed the courtyard and, back on the road, was looking all round.
I shouted louder, but, as the first time, to no avail.
Then Vitalis, suspecting the truth, climbed onto the parapet.
It didn't take him long to spot the white hat.
Poor little thing!" he said half aloud.
- Oh, please," I cried, encouraged by these words of compassion, "let me go back.
But he took me by the wrist and led me down the road.
Now that you're rested," he said, "let's go, my boy.
I tried to free myself, but he held me firmly.
Capi," he said, "Zerbino!
And the two dogs surrounded me: Capi behind, Zerbino in front.
We had to follow Vitalis.
After a few steps, I turned my head.
We had passed the crest of the mountain, and I could see neither our valley nor our house. Only the bluish hills in the distance seemed to reach up to the sky; my eyes were lost in boundless space.
V -- On the road
To buy children for forty francs, you don't necessarily have to be an ogre and stock up on fresh flesh in order to eat it.
Vitalis didn't want to eat me, and, by a rare exception among child buyers, he wasn't a bad man.
I soon had proof of this.
It was on the very crest of the mountain that separates the Loire basin from that of the Dordogne that he took my wrist and, almost immediately, we began to descend the south-facing slope.
After walking for about a quarter of an hour, he let go of my arm.
Now," he said, "walk slowly beside me, but don't forget that if you wanted to save yourself, Capi and Zerbino would have caught up with you very quickly; they have sharp teeth.
I felt that saving myself was now impossible and that it was therefore pointless to attempt it.
I sighed.
You have a heavy heart," Vitalis continued, "I understand that and I don't blame you. You can cry freely, if you want to. Just try to feel that I'm not taking you away for your own misfortune. What would have become of you? You would probably have been in a hospice. The people who brought you up are not your father and mother. Your mum, as you say, has been good to you and you love her, you're sorry to leave her, that's all very well; but remember that she couldn't have kept you in spite of her husband. This husband, for his part, is perhaps not as hard as you think. He doesn't have enough to live on, he's crippled, he can't work any more, and he calculates that he can't starve himself to feed you. Understand today, my boy, that life is too often a battle in which we don't do what we want.
No doubt these were words of wisdom, or at least of experience. But there was one fact that, at the moment, screamed louder than all the words -- separation.
I would no longer see the woman who had brought me up, who had caressed me, the woman I loved, my mother.
And the thought squeezed my throat, suffocated me. But I walked beside Vitalis, trying to repeat to myself what he had just told me.
Barberin was not my father, there was no reason why he should have to suffer misery for my sake. He had been willing to take me in and bring me up; if he sent me away now, it was because he could no longer look after me. It wasn't this day that I had to remember when thinking of him, but the years I had spent in his house.
Think about what I told you, boy," Vitalis repeated from time to time, "you won't be too unhappy with me.
After descending a fairly steep slope, we came to a vast moor that stretched flat and monotonous as far as the eye could see. No houses, no trees. A plateau covered in red heather, with here and there great sheets of stunted broom that swayed in the wind.
You see," Vitalis said to me, stretching out his hand over the moor, "it would be useless to try to save yourself, you would be immediately recaptured by Capi and Zerbino.
Save myself! I thought no more about it. Where else could I go? To whom?
After all, this tall, handsome old man with the white beard was perhaps not as terrible as I had first thought; and if he was my master, perhaps he would not be a ruthless master.
For a long time we walked through the sad solitudes, leaving the moors only to find fields of heath, and seeing all around us, as far as the eye could see, only a few rounded hills with barren summits.
I had formed an entirely different idea of travelling, and when I had sometimes left my village in my childish reveries, it had been for beautiful lands that bore no resemblance to those that reality showed me.
It was the first time I'd done such a walk in one go and without resting.
My legs were dragging and I had the greatest difficulty keeping up with my master. But I didn't dare ask him to stop.
It's your clogs that are making you tired," he said to me; "I'll buy you some shoes in Ussel.
- Is Ussel still far away?
- That's a cry from the heart," said Vitalis, laughing; "do you really want shoes, my boy? Well, I promise you some with nails underneath. And I also promise you a pair of velvet breeches, a jacket and a hat. This will dry your tears, I hope, and give you legs for the six leagues we have left.
Shoes, shoes with studs! velvet breeches! a jacket! a hat!
Ah! if Mother Barberin could see me, how happy she would be, how proud she would be of me!
What a pity that Ussel was still so far away! Despite the shoes and velvet breeches at the end of the six leagues we still had to cover, it seemed to me that I wouldn't be able to walk that far.
Fortunately the weather came to my aid.
The sky, which had been blue since we left, gradually filled up with grey clouds, and soon it began to rain lightly and it never stopped.
With his sheepskin, Vitalis was fairly well protected, and he could shelter Joli-Coeur who, at the first drop of rain, had quickly returned to his hiding place. But the dogs and I, who had nothing to cover ourselves, were soon wet to the skin; even so, the dogs could shake themselves off from time to time, whereas, as this natural means was not for me, I had to walk under a weight that crushed and froze me.
Do you catch cold easily?" my master asked me.
- I don't know; I don't remember ever catching a cold.
- Good, good; there's definitely some good in you. But I don't want to expose you unnecessarily, so we won't be going any further today. There's a village over there, we'll sleep there.
But there was no inn in the village, and no one wanted to take in a sort of beggar who was dragging a child and three dogs, each as filthy as the next.
Finally, a farmer who was more charitable than his neighbours was willing to open the door of a barn for us.
We had a roof over our heads and no more rain on our bodies.
Vitalis was a cautious man who never set off without provisions. In the soldier's bag he carried on his shoulders was a large loaf of bread, which he divided into four pieces.
Then I saw for the first time how he maintained obedience and discipline in his troop.
While we were wandering from door to door, looking for lodgings, Zerbino had gone into a house, and had come out again straight away, carrying a crust in his mouth. Vitalis said only one word:
"See you tonight, Zerbino".
I was no longer thinking about the theft when, just as our master was cutting the loaf, I saw Zerbino look downcast.
The three dogs were lined up in front of us, Capi and Dolce with their eyes fixed on their master's, Zerbino with his nose tilted forward and his ears shaved.
Let the thief come out of the ranks," said Vitalis in a commanding voice, "and go into a corner; he'll go to bed without supper.
Immediately Zerbino left his place and, crawling, went to hide in the corner that his master's hand had indicated to him. He buried himself completely under a clump of fern, and we could see him no more, but we could hear him bellowing plaintively with little muffled cries.
Once this was done, Vitalis handed me my bread and, while eating his own, he divided the morsels intended for them between Joli-Coeur, Capi and Dolce.
During the last few months that I had lived with Mother Barberin, I had certainly not been spoilt; however, the change seemed harsh to me.
Oh, how good the hot soup Mother Barberin made for us every evening would have tasted, even without butter!
How pleasant the fireside would have been! How happily I would have slipped into my sheets, pulling the covers up to my nose!
But, alas! there could be no question of sheets or blankets, and we must still have been very happy to have a bed of fern.
Would it now be like this every day? walking in the rain without rest, sleeping in a barn, shivering with cold, having for supper only a piece of dry bread, no one to complain about, no one to love, no more Mother Barberin!
As I pondered sadly, my heart heavy and my eyes full of tears, I felt a warm breath pass over my face.
I stretched out my hand and met Capi's woolly coat.
He had approached me gently, stepping carefully onto the fern, and he could smell me; he sniffed softly; his breath ran over my face and through my hair.
What did he want?
Soon he was lying on the fern, very close to me, and he gently began to lick my hand.
Moved by this caress, I half rose and kissed his cold nose.
He let out a muffled cry, then quickly put his paw in my hand and didn't move.
Then I forgot my fatigue and my sorrows; my constricted throat loosened, I breathed, I was no longer alone: I had a friend.
VI -- My debut
The next day we set off early.
There was no more rain, the sky was blue and, thanks to the dry wind that had blown during the night, there was little mud. The birds sang happily in the bushes along the way, and the dogs gambolled around us. From time to time, Capi would stand up on his hind legs and bark in my face a couple of times, the meaning of which I understood very well.
"Courage, courage!" they'd say.
Because he was a very intelligent dog, who understood everything and always made himself understood. I've often heard it said that all he lacked was the ability to speak. But I never thought so. In his tail alone there was more wit and eloquence than in the language or eyes of many people. In any case, words were never useful between him and me; from the very first day we understood each other.
Having never been outside my village, I was curious to see a town.
But I must admit that Ussel did not dazzle me. Its old houses with turrets, which are undoubtedly the delight of archaeologists, left me completely indifferent.
One idea filled my head and obscured my eyes, or at least only allowed them to see one thing: a cobbler's shop.
My shoes, the shoes promised by Vitalis, the time had come to put them on.
Where was the blessed shop that would provide them?
The only memory I have of Ussel is of a dark, smoky shop near the market hall. You had to go down three steps to enter, and then you found yourself in a large room where the sunlight had certainly never penetrated since the roof had been put on the house.
How could such a beautiful thing as shoes be sold in such a dreadful place!
However, Vitalis knew what he was doing when he came to this shop, and soon I had the pleasure of putting my feet into iron shoes that weighed ten times as much as my clogs. My master's generosity didn't stop there; after the shoes, he bought me a blue velvet jacket, woollen trousers and a felt hat; in short, everything he had promised me.
Velvet for me, who had never worn anything but canvas; shoes; a hat when all I'd ever had was my hair; he was definitely the best man in the world, the most generous and the richest.
It's true that the velvet was wrinkled, it's true that the wool was ragged; it's also true that it was very difficult to know what the original colour of the felt had been, so much rain and dust had fallen on it; but, dazzled by so much splendour, I was insensitive to the imperfections that hid beneath their brilliance.
I was in a hurry to put on these beautiful clothes, but before giving them to me, Vitalis made them undergo a transformation that threw me into painful astonishment.
On the way back to the inn, he took a pair of scissors from his bag and cut both legs of my trousers off at the knee.
As I looked at him with frightened eyes, he said:
This is just to make you look different," he said. If we go to Italy, which is possible, I'll dress you like a Frenchman.
This explanation did not stop my astonishment, so he continued:
"What are we? Actors whose very appearance should arouse curiosity. Do you think that if we went into the public square dressed like burghers or peasants, we would force people to look at us and stop around us? Wouldn't we? So learn that in life appearances are sometimes essential; it's unfortunate, but there's nothing we can do about it.
This is how, from being French in the morning, I became Italian before evening.
As my trousers stopped at the knee, Vitalis tied my stockings with red cords crossed all along the leg; he also crossed other ribbons on my felt and decorated it with a bunch of woollen flowers.
I don't know what others might have thought of me, but, to be honest, I must say that I thought I looked superb, and I must have done, because my friend Capi, after gazing at me for a long time, held out his paw with a satisfied air.
Capi's approval of my transformation was all the more pleasing to me because, while I was putting on my new clothes, Joli-Cœur had camped himself in front of me and imitated my movements, exaggerating them. When I had finished dressing, he put his hands on his hips and, tilting his head back, laughed and squealed mockingly.
I've heard it said that it's an interesting scientific question whether monkeys laugh. I think that those who have asked this question are chamber scientists who have never bothered to study monkeys. As someone who lived in close quarters with Joli-Coeur for a long time, I can say that he laughed, and often in a way that mortified me. No doubt his laughter was not exactly like that of a man. But at last, when a feeling of some kind provoked his gaiety, you could see the corners of his mouth pull back; his eyelids crinkled, his jaws moved quickly, and his black eyes seemed to shoot out flames like little coals being blown on.
Tomorrow we give our first performance," said Vitalis, "and you will be in it. So I must make you rehearse the part I have for you.
My astonished eyes told him that I did not understand him.
"By role I mean what you will have to do in this performance. If I have taken you with me, it is not precisely to give you the pleasure of a walk. I'm not rich enough for that. It's so that you can work. And your work will consist of acting with my dogs and Joli-Coeur.
- But I don't know how to act!
- That's precisely why I have to teach you. You must realise that it's not natural for Capi to walk so gracefully on her two hind legs, any more than it's for her pleasure that Dolce dances with a rope. Capi learned to stand on his hind legs, and Dolce also learned to rope dance; they even had to work long and hard to acquire these talents, as well as those that make them skilled actors. Well, you too have to work hard to learn the different roles you'll be playing with them. So let's get to work".
At the time I had very primitive ideas about work. I thought that to work you had to dig the earth, or split a tree, or cut a stone, and I couldn't imagine anything else.
The play we are about to perform," continued Vitalis, "is entitled Le Domestique de M. Joli-Cœur or Le plus bête des deux n'est pas celui qu'on pense. Here's the subject: Mr Joli-Coeur has had a servant up to now, Capi, with whom he is very happy. But Capi is getting old; and, on the other hand, Mr Joli-Coeur wants a new servant. Capi took it upon himself to get him one. But it won't be a dog that he gives himself as a successor, it will be a young boy, a peasant called Rémi.
- Like me?
- No, not like you, but like yourself. You've come from your village to work for Joli-Coeur.
- Monkeys don't have servants.
- In comedy they do. So you arrive, and Mr Joli-Coeur thinks you look like a fool.
- That's no fun.
- What's it to you, if it's all in fun? What's more, imagine that you've actually arrived at a gentleman's house to be a servant and that you've been told, for example, to set the table. Here's one to be used in our performance. Go ahead and set the table".
On this table were plates, a glass, a knife, a fork and white linen.
How was all this to be arranged?
As I asked myself these questions and stood with my arms outstretched, leaning forward, mouth open, not knowing where to start, my master clapped his hands and laughed out loud.
Bravo," he said, "bravo! It's perfect. Your physiognomy is excellent. The boy I had before you used to put on a smart face and his air clearly said: 'You'll see how well I can act like a beast'; you don't say anything, you just are, your naivety is admirable.
- I don't know what I should do.
-- And that's precisely why you're excellent. Tomorrow, in a few days, you'll know exactly what you have to do. That's when you'll have to remember the embarrassment you're feeling now, and pretend you don't feel it any more. If you can rediscover this look and attitude, I predict the greatest success. He arrives at a monkey's house and finds himself more ignorant and clumsier than the monkey; hence my subtitle: The dumber of the two is not the one you think. To play it to perfection, you would only have to remain what you are at the moment; but, as that is impossible, you will have to remember what you were and become, through an effort of art, what you will naturally no longer be."
Le Domestique de M. Joli-Cœur was not a great comedy, and its performance took no more than twenty minutes. But our rehearsal lasted nearly three hours, Vitalis making us repeat the same thing twice, four times, ten times, both to the dogs and to me.
The dogs had forgotten certain parts of their role, and had to be taught again.
I was surprised to see how patient and gentle our master was. This was not the way we treated animals in my village, where swearing and hitting were the only ways of educating them.
As far as he was concerned, as long as this long repetition went on, he didn't get angry once; not once did he swear.
Come on, let's start again," he would say sternly, when what he had asked for did not succeed; "it's bad, Capi; you're not paying attention, Joli-Coeur, you'll be scolded.
And that was all; but still it was enough.
Well," he said to me when the rehearsal was over, "do you think you'll get used to acting?
- I don't know," he said.
- Does it bore you?
- No, it amuses me.
- Then everything will be fine; you have intelligence and, what is perhaps even more precious, attention; with attention and docility, you can achieve anything. Look at my dogs and compare them to Joli-Coeur. Joli-Cœur may be more lively and intelligent, but he's not docile. He learns easily what he's taught, but he forgets it straight away. What's more, he's never happy to do what's asked of him; he'd gladly rebel, and he's always annoying. That's his nature, and that's why I don't get angry with him: like dogs, monkeys don't have a sense of duty, and that makes them very inferior. Do you understand that?
- I think so.
- So be attentive, my boy; be docile; do what you have to do to the best of your ability. That's what life is all about!
Talking like this, I took the liberty of telling him that what had surprised me most about this rehearsal was the unflagging patience he had shown, both with Joli-Coeur and the dogs and with me.
He began to smile softly:
You can see," he said, "that up until now you've only lived with peasants who are hard on their animals and believe that you should drive them around with your stick always up.
- Mama Barberin was very gentle with our cow, La Roussette," I said.
- She was right," he continued. You give me a good idea of Mama Barberin; it's that she knew what country people too often ignore, that you can achieve little through brutality, whereas you can achieve a lot, not to say everything, through gentleness. As far as I'm concerned, it's by never getting angry with my animals that I've made them what they are. If I had beaten them, they would have been fearful, and fear paralyses intelligence. Besides, if I let myself get angry with them, I wouldn't be what I am, and I wouldn't have acquired the unfailing patience that has won me your trust. If you teach others, you teach yourself. My dogs have taught me as many lessons as they have learned from me. I've developed their intelligence and they've shaped my character.
What I was hearing seemed so strange that I started laughing.
"You find it very strange, don't you, that a dog can give lessons to a man? And yet nothing could be further from the truth. Just think about it. Do you admit that a dog is influenced by its master?
- Of course I do.
- Then you will understand that the master is obliged to look after himself when he undertakes the education of a dog. So suppose for a moment that when I was teaching Capi I gave in to anger and outbursts of temper. In other words, by modelling himself on my example, he will have become corrupted. The dog is almost always the mirror of his master, and who sees one sees the other. Show me your dog and I'll tell you who you are. The brigand's dog is a scoundrel; the thief, a thief; the unintelligent peasant, a rude dog; the polite and affable man, an amiable dog.
My comrades, the dogs and the monkey, had the great advantage over me of being used to appearing in public, so they saw the next day coming without fear. For them it was a question of doing what they had already done a hundred times, perhaps a thousand times.
So I was deeply moved when we left our inn the next day to go to the square where our performance was to take place.
Vitalis led the way, his head held high, his chest arched, and he kept time with both arms and feet as he played a waltz on a metal fife. Behind him came Capi, on whose back lounged Mr Joli-Coeur, in the costume of an English general, red suit and trousers trimmed with gold, with a floppy hat topped with a broad plume. Then, at a respectful distance, came Zerbino and Dolce in a single line. Finally, I formed the tail of the procession, which, thanks to the spacing indicated by our master, took up a certain amount of space in the street.
But what attracted attention even more than the pomp of our procession were the piercing sounds of the fife, which went right into the houses and aroused the curiosity of the inhabitants of Ussel. People rushed to the doorways to see us pass; the curtains on all the windows were quickly lifted.
A few children followed us; amazed peasants joined them, and by the time we reached the square, we had a veritable procession behind and around us.
Our theatre was soon set up, consisting of a rope tied to four trees to form a long square, in the middle of which we stood.
The first part of the performance consisted of various tricks performed by the dogs; but what these tricks were, I could not say, busy as I was repeating my role to myself and troubled by anxiety.
It was up to Joli-Coeur and me to take the stage.
Ladies and gentlemen," said Vitalis, gesturing with his bow in one hand and his violin in the other, "we are going to continue the show with a charming comedy entitled: Le Domestique de M. Joli-Cœur ou le plus bête des deux n'est pas celui qu'on pense. A man like me doesn't stoop to praising his plays and his actors, so I have only one thing to say to you: open your eyes, open your ears and get your hands ready to applaud".
What he called "a charming comedy" was in fact a pantomime, in other words a play performed with gestures rather than words. And it had to be, for the good reason that two of the main actors, Joli-Coeur and Capi, could not speak, and the third (myself) would have been perfectly incapable of saying two words.
However, to make the actors' performance easier to understand, Vitalis accompanied it with a few words that prepared and explained the situations in the play.
Thus, playing a muted warlike tune, he announced the entrance of Mr Joli-Coeur, an English general who had earned his rank and fortune in the Indian wars. Until then, Mr Joli-Coeur had only had Capi as a servant, but he wanted to be served by a man from now on, as his means allowed him this luxury: animals had been slaves to men for long enough, and it was time for that to change.
While waiting for the servant to arrive, General Joli-Coeur strolled about and smoked his cigar. You should have seen how he threw his smoke in the face of the public!
He was getting impatient, the general, and he was starting to roll his eyes like someone about to get angry; he was biting his lips and stamping his foot on the ground.
At the third kick, I was to enter the stage, brought in by Capi.
If I had forgotten my role, the dog would have reminded me. At the right moment, he held out his paw and introduced me to the general.
When he saw me, he raised both arms in despair. Was this the servant he had been presented with? Then he looked up at me and shrugged his shoulders. His face was so funny that everyone burst out laughing: they had understood that he thought I was a complete fool, and that was how the audience felt too.
The play was, of course, designed to show this imbecility in all its facets; in each scene I had to do something stupid, while Joli-Cœur, on the other hand, had to find an opportunity to develop his intelligence and skill.
After examining me at length, the General, moved by pity, had me served lunch.
The general thinks that when this boy has eaten, he will be less stupid," said Vitalis; "we'll see about that.
And I sat down in front of a small table on which the place setting was set, with a napkin on my plate.
What should I do with this napkin?
Capi told me I had to use it. But how?
After much searching, I made the gesture of blowing my nose in it.
The general laughed and Capi fell over on all fours, knocked over by my stupidity.
Seeing that I was wrong, I looked at the towel again, wondering how to use it.
Finally an idea came to me; I rolled up the napkin and made myself a tie.
The general laughed again, and Capi fell again. And so it went on until the exasperated general pulled me out of my chair, sat down in my place and ate the lunch that was intended for me.
Ah! the General knew how to use a napkin. With what grace he passed it through a buttonhole in his uniform and spread it out on his knees! With what elegance he broke his bread and emptied his glass!
But where his fine manners produced an irresistible effect was when, after lunch, he asked for a toothpick and quickly passed it between his teeth.
Applause erupted from all sides, and the performance ended in triumph.
How clever the monkey was! How stupid the servant!
When we returned to our inn, Vitalis paid me this compliment, and I was such a good actor that I was proud of this praise.
VII -- I'm learning to read
They were certainly actors of the greatest talent, those who composed the troupe of Signor Vitalis -- I speak of the dogs and the monkey -- but this talent was not very varied.
By the time they had given three or four performances, their entire repertoire was known; all they could do was repeat themselves.
Hence the need not to stay long in any one town.
Three days after our arrival in Ussel, we had to set off again.
Where were we going? I had emboldened myself enough with my master to allow myself this question.
Do you know the country?" he replied, looking at me.
- I don't know the country.
- Then why are you asking me where we're going?
- To find out.
- To find out what?"
I remained dumbfounded, staring blankly at the white road that stretched out before us at the end of a wooded valley.
If I tell you," he continued, "that we're going to Aurillac and then on to Bordeaux and from Bordeaux to the Pyrenees, what will that tell you?
- Do you know the country?
- I've never been there.
- And yet you know where we're going?
He looked at me again for a long time, as if he was searching for something in me.
"You can't read, can you?
- No, I can't read.
- Do you know what a book is? In a book that I'm going to show you when we rest, we'll find the names and the history of the countries we're passing through. Men who have lived in or travelled through these countries have put in my book what they have seen or learnt; so all I have to do is open this book and read it to get to know these countries; I see them as if I were looking at them with my own eyes; I learn their history as if it were being told to me.
- Is it difficult to read?" I asked Vitalis after walking for a long time and thinking.
- It's difficult for those with a hard head, and even more difficult for those with a bad will. Are you hard-headed?
- I don't know, but it seems to me that if you wanted to teach me to read, I wouldn't be so ill-willed.
- Well, we'll see; we've got plenty of time.
The next day, as we were walking along, I saw my master bend down and pick up a piece of board from the road, half covered in dust.
"This is the book you're going to learn to read from," he said.
A book, that board! I looked at him to see if he was making fun of me. Then, as I thought he was serious, I took a good look at his discovery.
How to read this board, and what to read?
Your mind is at work," Vitalis laughed.
- Are you trying to make fun of me?
- Never, my boy; mockery can be good for reforming a vicious character, but when it is aimed at ignorance, it is a mark of foolishness in the person who uses it. Wait until we get to that clump of trees over there; we'll rest there, and you'll see how I can teach you to read with this piece of wood."
We soon reached the clump of trees and, with our bags on the ground, we sat down on the grass, which was beginning to turn green again and in which daisies were popping up here and there.
Then Vitalis, drawing his knife from his pocket, tried to detach from the plank a small wooden blade as thin as possible. Having succeeded, he polished the blade on both sides, along its entire length, and then cut it into small squares, so that it gave him a dozen small flat pieces of equal size.
On each of these small pieces of wood," he said, "tomorrow I'm going to carve a letter of the alphabet with the tip of my knife. In this way you will learn the shape of the letters, and when you know them well enough to recognise them quickly at first sight, you will join them together to form words. When you can form the words I tell you, you'll be able to read from a book.
Soon I had my pockets full of a collection of small pieces of wood, and I soon knew the letters of the alphabet; but learning to read was another matter, things didn't go so quickly, and there even came a time when I regretted having wanted to learn to read.
To be fair to myself, though, it wasn't laziness that made me regret it, it was self-love.
By teaching me the letters of the alphabet, Vitalis had thought that he could teach them to Capi at the same time; since the dog had managed to get the numbers of the hours into his head, why shouldn't he get the letters into his head?
I became Capi's classmate, or the dog became mine, as the case may be. Of course, Capi didn't have to call out the letters he saw, as he couldn't speak; but when our pieces of wood were spread out on the grass, he had to pull out the letters our teacher called out with his paw.
At first I made faster progress than he did, but if my intelligence was quicker, his memory was surer: a thing well learnt was for him a thing known forever; he never forgot it, and as he had no distractions, he never hesitated or made a mistake.
So when I made a mistake, our teacher would always say:
"Capi will know how to read before Rémi does".
And the dog, no doubt understanding, would wag his tail in triumph.
More stupid than a beast is good in comedy," Vitalis used to say, "but in reality it's shameful.
This stung me so much that I applied myself with all my heart, and while the poor dog was still writing his name, sorting out the four letters that make it up from all the letters of the alphabet, I finally managed to read in a book.
Now that you can read writing," said Vitalis, "would you like to learn to read music?
- When I learn music, will I be able to sing like you?
Vitalis sometimes sang, and without him suspecting it, it was a feast for me to listen to him.
"Would you like to sing like me?
- Oh, not like you, I know that's not possible, but I can sing.
- Do you enjoy hearing me sing?
- The nightingale sings well, but it seems to me that you sing even better. And then it's not the same thing at all; when you sing, you do what you want with me, I feel like crying or I feel like laughing, and then I'm going to tell you something that may seem silly to you: when you sing a sweet or sad tune, it takes me back to Mother Barberin, it's her I think of, it's her I see in our house; and yet I don't understand the words you say, because they're Italian."
I was talking to him as I looked at him, and it seemed to me that his eyes were getting wet; so I stopped and asked him if I was upsetting him to talk like that.
"Don't worry, I'll teach you to sing, and since you have a good heart, you too will make people cry and be applauded, you'll see?
He suddenly stopped, and I thought I understood that he did not want to let himself go on this subject. But I couldn't guess what was holding him back. It was only later that I learned about them, much later, and in painful and terrible circumstances, which I will recount as they arise in the course of my story.
The very next day, my master did for music what he had already done for reading, that is to say, he began again to carve small squares of wood, which he engraved with the tip of his knife.
But this time his work was more considerable, because the various signs necessary for the notation of music offer more complicated combinations than the alphabet.
In order to lighten my pockets, he used both sides of his wooden squares, and after crossing out five lines representing the staff, he inscribed the treble clef on one side and the bass clef on the other. Then, when he had prepared everything, the lessons began, and I must admit that they were no less difficult than the reading lessons. More than once Vitalis, so patient with his dogs, became exasperated with me.
With a beast," he cried, "you contain yourself because you know it's a beast, but you'll make me die!
And then, raising his hands to the sky in a theatrical gesture, he suddenly let them fall on his thighs where they clapped loudly. Joli-Cœur, who enjoyed repeating anything he found funny, had copied this gesture, and as he almost always attended my lessons, I used to get annoyed when I hesitated to see him raise his arms to the sky and drop his hands onto his thighs, making them clap.
"Joli-Cœur himself is laughing at you!" cried Vitalis.
At last the first steps were taken with more or less difficulty, and I had the satisfaction of solving a tune written by Vitalis on a sheet of paper.
That day he didn't clap his hands, but he did give me two friendly pats on each cheek, declaring that if I carried on like that I would certainly become a great singer.
Of course, these studies didn't happen overnight, and for weeks and months afterwards my pockets were constantly filled with my little pieces of wood.
What's more, my work was not as regular as that of a child attending school, and it was only in his spare time that my teacher could give me my lessons.
Every day we had to complete our route, which was more or less long, depending on how far the villages were from each other; we had to give our performances wherever we were lucky enough to collect a takings; we had to rehearse the roles for the dogs and Mr. Joli-Coeur; we had to prepare the stage for our performances. We had to rehearse the roles for the dogs and Mr Joli-Coeur; we had to prepare our own lunch or dinner, and it was only after all that that we could talk about reading or music, usually at a rest stop, at the foot of a tree, or on a pile of stones, with the grass or the road serving as a table to spread out my pieces of wood.
This education bore little resemblance to that received by so many children, who have only to work and yet complain that they have no time to do the homework they are given. But it has to be said that there's something even more important than the time we spend on our work, and that's the application we put into it; it's not the hour we spend on our lesson that puts that lesson in our memory, it's the will to learn.
At last I learnt something, and at the same time I learnt to take long walks, which were no less useful than Vitalis' lessons. I was a rather puny child when I lived with mother Barberin, and the way I was spoken of proves it well: "a child of the city", Barberin had said, "with legs and arms too thin", Vitalis had said; My legs and arms grew stronger, my lungs developed, my skin became armoured, and I became capable of withstanding, without suffering, the cold as well as the heat, the sun as well as the rain, the hardship, the privations, the fatigue. 
And this apprenticeship was a great joy for me; it put me in a position to withstand the blows that more than once were to come down on me, hard and crushing, during my youth.
VIII -- Over hill and dale
We had travelled through part of southern France: the Auvergne, the Velay, the Vivarais, the Quercy, the Rouergue, the Cévennes and the Languedoc. Our way of travelling was very simple: we went straight ahead, at random, and when we found a village that didn't look too shabby from afar, we prepared to make a triumphal entry. I groomed the dogs, combed Dolce's hair, dressed Zerbino, put a plaster on Capi's eye so that he could play the role of an old grunt; finally I forced Joli-Cœur to put on his general's uniform. But this was the most difficult part of my task, because the monkey, who knew very well that this dressing was the prelude to a job for him, defended himself as much as he could, and invented the funniest tricks to prevent me from dressing him. So I called Capi to my aid, and by his vigilance, instinct and finesse, he almost always managed to foil the monkey's tricks.
With the troop in full regalia, Vitalis took up his fife and, putting ourselves in fine order, we marched through the village.
If the number of onlookers behind us was sufficient, we gave a performance; if, on the other hand, it was too small to raise any money, we continued our march. Only in the towns did we stay for several days, and then, in the morning, I was free to go for a walk wherever I wanted. I took Capi with me -- Capi, a mere dog, of course, without his theatrical costume, and we strolled through the streets.
Vitalis, who usually kept me close to him, was happy to put the reins on my neck.
He said to me: "Since chance has taken you all over France at an age when children are generally at school or college, open your eyes, look and learn. When you're embarrassed, when you see something you don't understand, if you have any questions, ask me without fear. Maybe I won't always be able to answer you, because I don't claim to know everything, but maybe I'll be able to satisfy your curiosity from time to time. I haven't always been the director of a troupe of performing animals, and I've learnt something other than what is currently useful to me for 'presenting Capi or Mr Joli-Cœur to the honourable society'.
- And what is that?
- We'll talk about that later. For the moment, just know that a dog showman may have held a certain position in the world. At the same time, understand that, if at the moment you are on the lowest step of the staircase of life, you can, if you want to, reach a higher one little by little. That depends on the circumstances for some, and for many, of you. Listen to my lessons, listen to my advice, child, and later, when you are grown up, I hope you will think with emotion and gratitude of the poor musician who frightened you so much when he took you away from your foster mother; I have the idea that our meeting will be happy for you."
After leaving the mountains of Auvergne, we had arrived in the Causses of Quercy. This is the name given to large, unevenly undulating plains, where there is little more than wasteland and meagre coppice. No country is sadder or poorer.
In the middle of this plain, scorched by drought as we crossed it, is a large village called La Bastide-Murat; we spent the night there in the barn of an inn.
It was here," Vitalis told me as we chatted in the evening before going to bed, "it was here, in this country, and probably in this inn, that a man was born who had thousands of soldiers killed and who, having started life as a stable boy, became a prince and a king: his name was Murat; he was made a hero and this village was named after him. I knew him, and I often spoke with him.
In spite of myself, an interruption escaped me.
"When he was a stable boy?
- No," replied Vitalis, laughing, "when he was king. This is the first time I've been to La Bastide, and it was in Naples that I met him, in the midst of his court.
- You knew a king!
The tone of my exclamation must have been very funny, because my master laughed again and continued for a long time.
Do you want to sleep?" asked Vitalis, "or would you like me to tell you the story of King Murat?
- Oh, the story of the king, please!
So he told me the whole story, and for several hours we remained on our bench; he talking, I with my eyes fixed on his face, which the moon was lighting up with its pale light. Well, it was all possible; not only possible, but true!
My master had seen so many things!
What was my master when he was young? And how had he become what I saw in his old age?
There was enough here, I'm sure you'll agree, to stir a child's imagination, alert and curious about the marvellous.
IX -- I meet a giant in seven-league boots
Leaving the parched soil of the causses and the garrigues, I find myself, through memory, in a valley that is always fresh and green, that of the Dordogne, which we descend in short bursts, for the wealth of the country makes that of the inhabitants, and our performances are numerous; the pennies fall quite easily into Capi's begging bowl.
An airy, light bridge, as if held up in the fog by the Virgin's threads, rises above a wide river that gently rolls its lazy waters; -- it's the Cubzac bridge, and the river is the Dordogne.
A ruined town with moats, caves, towers and, amid the crumbling walls of a cloister, cicadas singing in the shrubs hanging here and there -- that's Saint-Émilion.
For a long time we had been walking along a powdery road, when all of a sudden our gaze, which until then had been confined to a path bordered by vines, was opened up to an immense space, as if a curtain, touched by a magic wand, had suddenly been lowered in front of us.
A wide river flowed gently around the hill we had just reached, and beyond it the roofs and steeples of a large city were scattered across the indistinct curve of the horizon. So many houses! So many chimneys! On the river, in the middle of its course and along a line of quays, were crowded numerous ships which, like the trees of a forest, intertwined their masts, their ropes, their sails, their multicoloured flags fluttering in the wind.
"This is Bordeaux," Vitalis said to me.
For a child brought up like me, who up until then had only seen the poor villages of the Creuse, or the few small towns that the chance of the road had brought us across, it was enchanting.
"There are ships arriving from the open sea, after long voyages: these are the ones whose paintwork is soiled and which look as if they have rusted; there are others leaving the port; those that you see, in the middle of the river, turn on themselves, avoid their anchors so as to present their bow to the rising tide. Those which run wrapped in clouds of smoke are tugs".
What strange words for me! What new ideas!
By the time we reached the bridge that connects La Bastide with Bordeaux, Vitalis hadn't had time to answer the hundredth part of the questions I wanted to ask him.
From Bordeaux we had to go to Pau. Our route took us through the great desert that stretches from the gates of Bordeaux to the Pyrenees and is called the Landes.
We left Bordeaux and, after first following the banks of the Garonne, abandoned the river at Langon and took the road to Mont-de-Marsan, which winds its way through the countryside. No more vineyards, no more meadows, no more orchards, but pine and heather woods.
Here we are in the Landes", said Vitalis, "we have twenty or twenty-five leagues to go in the middle of this desert. Put your courage into your legs".
It was not only in the legs that we had to put it, but in the head and the heart, because, walking on this road that seemed to never end, we felt invaded by an insurmountable sadness.
The hope of arriving soon had made us hasten our pace, and my master himself, despite his habit of long walks, was feeling tired. He wanted to stop and rest for a while by the side of the road.
But instead of sitting next to him, I wanted to climb a small mound planted with broom that was a short distance from the path, to see if from there I couldn't see some light on the plain.
I called Capi to come with me, but Capi was also tired and turned a deaf ear, which was his usual tactic with me when he didn't like obeying me.
"Are you afraid?" asked Vitalis.
This word decided me not to insist, and I set off alone on my exploration; I was all the less willing to expose myself to my master's jokes as I didn't feel the least bit frightened.
However, the night had come, without a moon, but with twinkling stars that lit up the sky and poured their light into the air laden with light vapours through which the gaze passed.
As I walked along, casting my eyes to right and left, I noticed that this vaporous twilight gave things strange shapes. It took some reasoning to recognise the bushes, the clumps of broom and especially the few small trees that here and there erected their twisted trunks and contorted branches; from a distance these bushes, brooms and trees looked like living beings belonging to a fantastic world.
However, it wasn't long before I reached the top of this little mound. But no matter how hard I opened my eyes, I couldn't see a single light.
After standing there for a while with my ear to the ground, not breathing so as to hear better, I shuddered; the silence of the moor had frightened me; I was afraid. Of what? I had no idea. Of the silence, no doubt, the solitude and the night. In any case, I felt as if I were in danger.
At that very moment, looking around anxiously, I saw a large shadow in the distance moving quickly over the broom, and at the same time I heard the rustle of branches brushing against each other.
Was it someone? But no, it couldn't have been a man, that great black body coming towards me; it could have been an animal that I didn't know, a gigantic night bird, or an immense four-legged spider whose spindly limbs stood out above the bushes and ferns against the paleness of the sky.
What was certain was that this beast, mounted on legs of inordinate length, was advancing on my side with precipitous leaps.
It had certainly seen me and was running towards me.
This thought made me regain my legs and, turning on myself, I rushed down the slope to catch up with Vitalis.
But however fast I went, the beast was going even faster than me; I didn't need to turn round any more, I could feel it on my back.
But I made one last effort and fell at my master's feet, while the three dogs, who had suddenly risen to their feet, barked at the top of their voices.
I could only say two words, which I repeated mechanically:
"The beast, the beast!
- The beast is always you," he laughed; "take a look, if you dare.
His laughter, even more than his words, brought me to my senses; I dared to open my eyes and follow the direction of his hand.
The apparition that had frightened me had stopped and was standing motionless on the road.
I took courage and fixed my eyes on it more firmly.
Was it a beast? Was it a man?
It had the body, head and arms of a man. Of the beast, a hairy skin that covered her entirely, and two long skinny legs five or six feet high on which she stood.
I would probably have remained undecided for a long time, turning my question round and round, if my master had not spoken to my apparition.
"Could you tell me if we are far from a village?" he asked.
So it was a man, since we were talking to him?
But all I heard in reply was a dry laugh similar to the cry of a bird.
So it was an animal?
I was astonished when this animal said that there were no houses nearby, only a sheepfold, where it offered to take us!
Since he was talking, how did he have legs?
Do you see now what frightened you so?" Vitalis asked me as we walked along.
- Yes, but I don't know what it is: are there giants in this country?
- Yes, when they're mounted on stilts.
And he explained to me how the Landais, in order to cross their sandy or marshy land and not sink into it up to their hips, used two long sticks with stirrups, to which they attached their feet.
"And this is how they become giants with seven-league boots for fearful children.
X -- In court
I have pleasant memories of Pau; the wind hardly ever blows in this town. And as we stayed there during the winter, spending our days in the streets, in the public squares and on the promenades, it is understandable that I must have been sensitive to an advantage of this kind.
It was not this reason, however, which, contrary to our custom, determined this long stay in one place, but another one which was legitimately all-powerful with my master, -- I mean the abundance of our income.
Indeed, throughout the winter we had an audience of children who never tired of our repertoire and never shouted at us: "It's always the same thing!
Most of them were English children: big boys with pink flesh and pretty little girls with big soft eyes, almost as beautiful as Dolce's.
When the warm spring days arrived, our audience began to dwindle, and more than once, after the performance, children came to shake hands with Joli-Coeur and Capi. It was their farewell; the next day we were never to see them again.
We resumed our wandering life, adventuring along the highways and byways.
For a long time, I don't know how many days, how many weeks, we went before us, following valleys, climbing hills, always leaving to our right the bluish peaks of the Pyrenees, like heaps of clouds.
Then, one evening, we came to a large town on the banks of a river in the middle of a fertile plain. The houses, most of them very ugly, were built of red bricks; the streets were paved with small sharp stones, hard on the feet of travellers who had travelled ten leagues in a day.
My master told me that we were in Toulouse and that we would be staying there for a long time.
As usual, our first task the next day was to look for places suitable for our performances.
We found a great many, for there is no shortage of promenades in Toulouse, especially in the part of the city that borders the Jardin des Plantes; there is a beautiful lawn shaded by tall trees, onto which several boulevards called allées open out. It was in one of these alleys that we set up, and from our first performances we had a large audience.
Unfortunately, the policeman who was in charge of this alley took a dim view of our installation and, either because he didn't like dogs, or because we were a nuisance in his department, or for some other reason, he wanted us to give up our place.
Perhaps, in our position, it would have been wise to give in to this harassment, for the struggle between poor acrobats such as ourselves and the police was not on equal terms; but, owing to a disposition of mind which was not usual in my master, who was almost always very patient, he did not think so.
Although he was only a poor and old dog trainer - at least for the time being - he had pride; moreover, he had what he called a sense of entitlement, that is to say, as he explained it to me, the conviction that he should be protected as long as he did nothing contrary to the laws or police regulations.
He therefore refused to obey the officer when the latter wanted to evict us from our driveway.
The officer replied that there was nothing to discuss, only to obey.
You must muzzle your dogs," he said harshly to Vitalis.
- Muzzle my dogs!
- Yes, muzzle your dogs, and faster than that.
- Muzzle Capi, Zerbino, Dolce!" cried Vitalis, addressing himself much more to the public than to the agent, "but your Lordship doesn't think of that! How can the learned physician Capi, known throughout the world, administer his medicines to his patient if the latter wears a muzzle at the end of his nose? Allow me to point out to you, signor, that it is through the mouth that medicine must be administered if it is to have any effect. Doctor Capi would never have allowed himself to point him in any other direction in front of this distinguished audience.
At this, there was an explosion of laughter.
If by tomorrow your dogs are not muzzled," cried the agent, threatening us with his fist, "I'll sue you; that's all I'm saying.
- See you tomorrow, signor," said Vitalis, "see you tomorrow.
I thought my master was going to buy muzzles for our dogs, but he didn't, and the evening passed without him even talking about his quarrel with the policeman.
Then I took the courage to tell him myself.
If you don't want Capi to break his muzzle tomorrow during the performance," I said, "I think it would be a good idea to put it on him a little in advance. If you keep an eye on him, you might get him used to it.
- So you think I'm going to put an iron frame on them?
- It seems to me that the agent is willing to torment you.
- Don't worry, I'll arrange things tomorrow so that the agent can't sue me, and at the same time so that my pupils aren't too unhappy. On the other hand, it's also good for the public to have a bit of fun. This agent will provide us with more than one good source of income; he will, without suspecting it, play a comic role in the play I am preparing for him; this will give variety to our repertoire and will go no further than necessary. To that end, tomorrow you will go to our place alone with Joli-Coeur; you will stretch the strings, play a few harp pieces, and when you have a sufficient audience around you and the agent has arrived, I will make my entrance with the dogs. Then the comedy will begin.
I didn't have a good idea of all this.
The next day I went to our usual place and stretched my strings. I had scarcely played a few bars when people rushed in from all sides and crowded into the enclosure I had just drawn.
Seeing me alone with Joli-Cœur, more than one worried spectator interrupted me to ask if the "Italian" wasn't coming.
"He'll be here soon".
It wasn't my master who arrived, it was the police officer. Joli-Cœur was the first to see him, and immediately, putting his hand on his hip and throwing his head back, he began to walk all around me, stiff and arched, with a ridiculous poise.
The audience burst into laughter and applauded several times.
The agent's face did not give me much hope; he was really furious, exasperated by anger.
Joli-Cœur, who didn't understand the seriousness of the situation, was amused by the agent's attitude. He too walked along my rope, but on the inside, while the agent walked on the outside, and as he passed in front of me he in turn looked at me over his shoulder with such a funny look on his face that the laughter of the audience doubled.
I don't know how it happened, but the agent, who was undoubtedly blinded by anger, imagined that I was exciting the monkey, and quickly stepped over the rope.
In two strides he was on top of me, and I felt half knocked over by a blow.
When I got back on my feet and opened my eyes again, Vitalis, who had somehow appeared, was standing between me and the agent, whom he was holding by the wrist.
I forbid you to hit this child," he said; "what you have done is cowardly.
The officer tried to free his hand, but Vitalis squeezed his.
And for a few seconds, the two men looked each other in the eye.
The agent was furious.
My master was magnificent in his nobility; he held high his beautiful head framed by white hair and his face expressed indignation and command.
It seemed to me that, faced with this attitude, the agent was going to go back underground, but this was not the case: with a vigorous movement, he freed his hand, grabbed my master by the collar and brutally pushed him in front of him.
Vitalis, indignant, got to his feet and, raising his right arm, struck hard at the agent's wrist to free himself.
What do you want from us?" asked Vitalis.
- I want to arrest you; follow me to the station.
- It wasn't necessary to hit that child to achieve your ends," replied Vitalis.
- Don't talk, just follow me!
Vitalis had regained his composure; he did not reply, but, turning to me, said:
Go back to the inn," he said, "stay there with the dogs, I'll send you some news.
He couldn't say any more, the agent dragged him away.
I returned to the inn very distressed and worried.
I was no longer in the days when Vitalis used to frighten me. In fact, that time had only lasted a few hours. It wasn't long before I'd developed a sincere affection for him, which grew stronger every day. We lived the same life, always together from morning to night, and often from night to morning, when we shared the same bale of straw for our bed. A father has no more care for his child than he had for me. He taught me to read, sing, write and count. On our long walks, he always used the time to give me lessons on one thing or another, depending on circumstances or chance. On very cold days, he shared his blankets with me; on very hot days, he always helped me carry my share of luggage and belongings. At the table, or more precisely, at our meals, because we didn't often eat at the table, he never left me the bad bit, reserving the best for himself; on the contrary, he shared the good and the bad with us equally. Sometimes, it's true, he tugged at my ears and gave me a hard time; but these little corrections were not enough to make me forget his care, his kind words and all the expressions of tenderness he had given me since we had been together. He loved me and I loved him.
So I spent two days in anguish, not daring to leave the courtyard of the inn, looking after Joli-Coeur and the dogs, who were all worried and sad.
Finally, on the third day, a man brought me a letter from Vitalis.
In it, my master told me that he was being held in prison to be tried on the following Saturday for resisting an officer of the law and assaulting him.
By allowing myself to be carried away by anger," he added, "I've made a serious mistake that could cost me dearly. Come to the hearing; you'll learn a lesson.
Having made enquiries, I was told that the criminal court hearing started at ten o'clock. At nine o'clock on Saturday, I leaned against the door and was the first to enter the courtroom. Little by little, the room filled up and I recognised several people who had witnessed the scene with the police officer.
I didn't know what the courts and justice were, but instinctively I had a horrible fear of them; it seemed to me that, although it was my master and not me, I was in danger. I went and huddled behind a large stove and, sinking against the wall, made myself as small as possible.
What was said at first, what was asked of him, what he answered, I don't know; I was too moved to hear, or at least to understand. Besides, I wasn't thinking about listening, I was watching. I was looking at my master, who was standing there with his long white hair slicked back in the attitude of a man ashamed and pained; I was looking at the judge who was questioning him.
So," said the judge, "you admit that you hit the arresting officer?
- Not blows, Mr President, but a blow, and to free myself from his embrace; when I arrived on the square where our performance was to take place, I saw the officer give a blow to the child who was accompanying me.
- Isn't this child yours?
- No, Mr President, but I love him as if he were my own son. When I saw him strike, I let myself be carried away by anger, I grabbed the officer's hand and prevented him from striking again.
- Let's hear what the officer has to say.
He recounted the facts as they had happened, but insisting more on the way he had been mocked, his voice, his gestures, than on the blow he had received.
During this statement, Vitalis, instead of listening attentively, looked around the room. I realised he was looking for me. So I decided to leave my shelter and, slipping through the crowd of onlookers, I made my way to the front row.
He saw me and his sad face lit up; I felt that he was happy to see me and, in spite of myself, my eyes filled with tears.
Is that all you have to say in your defence?" asked the president at last.
- For myself, I have nothing to add, but for the sake of the child I love dearly and who will be left alone, for his sake, I beg the indulgence of the court and ask it to keep us apart for as short a time as possible.
I thought they were going to release my master. But this did not happen.
Another magistrate spoke for a few minutes; then the president, in a serious voice, said that Vitalis, convicted of insulting and assaulting a police officer, was sentenced to two months in prison and a fine of one hundred francs.
Two months in prison!
Through my tears, I saw the door through which Vitalis had entered reopen; he followed a gendarme, then the door closed again.
Two months' separation!
Where were we to go?
XI -- By boat
When I returned to the inn, with a heavy heart and red eyes, I found the innkeeper under the courtyard door, looking at me for a long time.
I was about to go and join the dogs when he stopped me.
Well," he said, "what about your master?
- He's been sentenced.
- To how much?
- Two months in prison.
- And how much of a fine?
- A hundred francs.
- Two months, a hundred francs," he repeated three or four times. I can't give you credit for two months without knowing whether I'll get paid in the end.
- Away! But where do you want me to go, sir?
- That's none of my business: I'm not your father, nor am I your master. Why do you want me to look after you?
- But, sir, where do you expect my master to find me when he gets out of prison? He'll come looking for me here.
- All you have to do is come back that day; in the meantime, go for a two-month walk around the area, to the water towns. There's money to be made in Bagnères, Cauterets and Luz.
I went into the stable and, after untying the dogs and Joli-Cœur, buckling my bag and slinging the strap of my harp over my shoulder, I left the inn.
As I walked quickly, the dogs looked up at me with a look that needed no words to be understood: they were hungry.
Joli-Cœur, whom I carried perched on my sack, would occasionally tug at my ear to force me to turn my head towards him; then he would brush his belly with a gesture that was no less expressive than the dogs' gaze.
I think we walked for nearly two hours without me daring to stop, and yet the dogs kept making more and more pleading eyes at me, while Joli-Cœur kept tugging at my ear and brushing his belly harder and harder.
Finally I thought I was far enough away from Toulouse to have nothing to fear, or at least to say that I would muzzle my dogs the next day if they asked me to, and I went into the first baker's shop I found.
I asked for a pound and a half of bread.
"The baker said to me: "You can have a two-pound loaf; with your menagerie it's not too much; you've got to feed those poor animals!
Bread was then five sous a pound, and if I took two pounds, they would cost me ten sous, so I would only have one sous left out of my eleven.
I quickly made this calculation and told the baker, with an air that I tried to make confident, that I had enough of a pound and a half of bread and that I begged her not to cut me any more.
"It's fine, it's fine", she replied.
And, around a nice six-pound loaf that we would certainly have eaten whole, she cut the quantity I asked for and put it in the scales, which she gave a little tap.
That's a bit much," she said, "that'll be for the two cents.
And she dropped my eight cents into her drawer.
I've seen people push away the pennies they were given back, saying they didn't know what to do with them; I wouldn't have pushed away the ones I was owed, but I didn't dare ask for them back and went out without saying a word, with my bread tucked tightly under my arm.
Cutting up my loaf was a tricky business; I made five slices as equal as possible, and, to avoid wasting any bread, I distributed them in small slices; each had his piece in turn, as if we had eaten from a bowl.
Although this feast had nothing of the kind that provokes speeches, the time had come for me to say a few words to my comrades. I naturally considered myself to be their leader, but I didn't think I was above them enough to be excused from telling them about the serious circumstances in which we found ourselves.
Capi had no doubt guessed my intention, for his large, intelligent and affectionate eyes were glued to mine.
Yes, my friend Capi," I said, "yes, my friends Dolce, Zerbino and Joli-Coeur, yes, my dear comrades, I have some bad news to tell you: our master is away from us for two months.
- Wow!" cried Capi.
- It's very sad for him first of all, and also for us. He was our bread and butter, and in his absence we're going to find ourselves in a terrible situation. We have no money."
At this word, which he knew perfectly well, Capi stood up on his hind legs and began to walk in circles as if he were collecting in the "ranks of honourable society".
You want us to give performances," I continued, "that's certainly good advice, but will we make money? It's all there. If we don't succeed, I warn you that our only fortune is three sous. So we'll have to tighten our bellies. This being the case, I hope that you will understand the seriousness of the circumstances, and that instead of playing tricks on me, you will put your intelligence at the service of society. I ask you to be obedient, sober and courageous. Let us close ranks, and count on me as I count on you.
I dare not say that my comrades understood all the beauties of my improvised speech, but they certainly felt the general ideas. They knew from our master's absence that something serious was going on, and they expected me to explain. If they did not understand everything I told them, they were at least satisfied with my procedure towards them, and they proved their contentment by their attention.
After a few moments' rest, I gave the signal to leave; we had to earn our bed, or at least our breakfast for the next day, if, as was likely, we could spare sleeping in the open air.
"We're going to sleep under the stars; anywhere, without supper.
At the word supper, there was a general groan.
I showed my three sous.
"You know that's all we've got left; if we spend our three sous tonight, we'll have nothing for lunch tomorrow; and as we've eaten today, I think it's wise to think about tomorrow.
And I put my three pennies back in my pocket.
Capi and Dolce bowed their heads in resignation; but Zerbino, who was not always good-natured and who was also greedy, continued to scold.
After looking at him severely without being able to shut him up, I turned to Capi and said:
Explain to Zerbino," I said, "what he doesn't seem to want to understand: we must go without a second meal today if we are to have just one tomorrow.
Capi immediately pawed at his comrade, and a discussion seemed to begin between them.
Don't think that the word 'discussion' is inappropriate because it is applied to two animals. It is quite certain, in fact, that animals have a language particular to each species. If you have lived in a house from whose cornices or windows swallows hang their nests, you are surely convinced that these birds do not simply whistle a little tune, when in the early morning they chatter so lively among themselves; they hold real speeches, discuss serious matters, or exchange words of tenderness. And ants from the same tribe, when they meet on a path and rub antennae against antennae, what do you think they are doing if you don't admit that they are communicating to each other what interests them? As for dogs, not only can they speak, they can also read: see them with their noses up in the air, or with their heads down, sniffing the ground, smelling the stones and bushes; suddenly they stop in front of a tuft of grass or a wall, while the dog reads all sorts of curious things, written in a mysterious font that we can't even see.
I only saw that Zerbino refused to listen to reason and insisted on spending the three pennies immediately; Capi had to get angry, and it was only when he had shown his fangs that Zerbino, who was not very brave, resigned himself to silence.
With the question of supper thus settled, all that remained was that of bedtime.
Leaving the road, we entered the middle of the rocks, and soon I saw an enormous block of granite planted across so as to form a sort of cavity at the base and a roof at the top. In this cavity, the winds had piled up a thick bed of dried pine needles. We couldn't have found a better place: a mattress to lie on, a roof to shelter us; all we needed was a piece of bread for supper; but we had to try not to think about that; besides, the proverb says: "He who sleeps, dines".
Before going to sleep, I explained to Capi that I was counting on him to look after us, and the good beast, instead of coming with us to lie down on the pine needles, stayed outside our shelter, standing sentinel. I could rest easy knowing that no one would approach us without my warning.
However, although I was reassured on this point, I did not fall asleep as soon as I lay down on the pine needles, with Joli-Coeur wrapped up next to me in my jacket, and Zerbino and Dolce lying in a circle at my feet, my anxiety being even greater than my tiredness.
The day, the first day of my journey, had been a bad one: what would the next day be like? How could I feed my troupe, how could I feed myself, if I couldn't find something to perform the next day and the days after that? Where would I get muzzles and permission to sing? Would we all have to die of hunger in the woods, under a bush?
My eyes filled with tears, and suddenly I began to cry: poor Mother Barberin! poor Vitalis!
I was lying on my stomach and crying unceasingly into my hands when I felt a warm breath pass through my hair; I turned round and a big, soft, warm tongue pressed against my face. It was Capi, who had heard me crying and had come to console me, as he had already come to my aid on my first night's journey.
I took him by the neck with both arms and kissed his wet muzzle; then he gave two or three muffled moans, and it seemed to me that he was crying with me.
When I woke up, it was broad daylight and Capi, sitting in front of me, was looking at me; the birds were whistling in the foliage; in the distance, far away, a bell was ringing the Angelus; the sun, already high in the sky, was casting warm, comforting rays, as much for the heart as for the body.
My mind was made up: I'd spend my three pennies, and then we'd see.
When we arrived in the village, I didn't need to ask where the bakery was; our noses surely guided us to it; my sense of smell was almost as keen as my dogs' to smell the good aroma of warm bread from afar.
Three pennies' worth of bread, when it cost five pennies a pound, gave us each only a very small morsel, and our lunch was soon over.
So the time had come to take a look, in other words to think about how to make a profit during the day. To this end I set out to explore the village, looking for the most favourable place for a performance, and also examining the faces of the people to try to guess whether they would be friends or enemies.
I was absorbed in this idea when suddenly I heard shouting behind me; I turned round quickly and saw Zerbino coming, pursued by an old woman. It didn't take me long to work out what was causing the chase and the shouting: taking advantage of my distraction, Zerbino had abandoned me and gone into a house where he had stolen a piece of meat and was carrying it in his mouth.
"Stop him! Stop them all!
Hearing these last words, feeling guilty, or at least responsible for my dog's fault, I started to run too. What would I say if the old woman asked me for the price of the stolen piece of meat? How could I pay for it? Once we were arrested, wouldn't they keep us?
Seeing me run, Capi and Dolce did not stay behind, and I felt them on my heels, while Joli-Coeur, whom I was carrying on my shoulder, grabbed me by the neck so as not to fall.
Still running at full speed, we were soon in the middle of the countryside, which was at least two kilometres away. Then I turned round, daring to look back; no one was following us; Capi and Dolce were still hot on my heels, and Zerbino was coming up in the distance, no doubt having stopped to eat his piece of meat.
I called out to him, but Zerbino, who knew he had earned a severe beating, stopped, and then, instead of coming to me, ran away.
I had* *recourse to Capi.
"Go and fetch me Zerbino.
And he left at once to carry out the mission I had entrusted to him. However, it seemed to me that he accepted this role with less zeal than usual, and in the look he gave me before leaving I thought I saw that he would be more willing to act as Zerbino's advocate than as my constable.
An hour passed without either of them returning, and I was beginning to worry when Capi came back alone, his head down.
"Where's Zerbino?
Capi lay down in a fearful attitude; then, looking at him, I noticed that one of his ears was bloody.
I didn't need any explanation to understand what had happened: Zerbino had rebelled against the gendarmerie, he had put up resistance, and Capi, who perhaps only reluctantly obeyed an order that he considered very harsh, had let himself be beaten.
As Capi's expedition had not succeeded, there was only one resource left to me, and that was to wait for Zerbino to come back; I knew him, after his initial rebellion he would resign himself to his punishment, and I would see him appear repentant.
As time passed and Zerbino did not come, I once again sent Capi in search of his comrade; but after half an hour, he returned alone and told me that he had not found him.
What was to be done?
Even though Zerbino was guilty and had put us all in a terrible situation, I couldn't think of abandoning him. What would my master say if I didn't bring his three dogs back to him? And then, in spite of everything, I loved that rascal Zerbino.
We had to come up with something to keep the four of us busy and distracted.
As I was considering this question, I remembered that Vitalis had told me that in the war, when a regiment was tired after a long march, they used to play music, so that by hearing cheerful or lively tunes the soldiers forgot their fatigue.
I took my harp, which was resting against a tree, and, with my back to the canal, after getting my actors into position, I began to play a dance tune, followed by a waltz.
Suddenly I heard a clear voice, a child's voice, shouting: "Bravo! The voice came from behind me. I turned round quickly.
A boat had stopped on the canal, its bow facing the bank on which I was standing; the two horses towing it had stopped on the opposite bank.
It was a peculiar boat, and the like of which I had not yet seen: it was much shorter than the barges usually used for canal navigation, and above its deck, which was not very high above the water, was built a sort of glass gallery. At the front of this gallery was a veranda shaded by climbing plants, whose foliage, clinging here and there to the cut-outs in the roof, fell in places in green cascades; under this veranda I saw two people: a lady, still young, with a noble and melancholy air, who was standing, and a child, a boy about my age, who seemed to me to be lying down.
It was no doubt this child who had shouted "Bravo".
Recovering from my surprise, for there was nothing frightening about this appearance, I lifted my hat to thank the man who had applauded me.
Is it for your pleasure that you play?" asked the lady, speaking with a foreign accent.
- It's to make my actors work and also... to amuse myself."
The child made a sign, and the lady leaned towards him.
"Do you want to play again?" the lady asked, raising her head.
If I wanted to play! To play for an audience that came to me so opportunely! I didn't hesitate.
So I picked up my harp again and started to play a waltz; Capi immediately put his two paws around Dolce's waist and they began to turn in time. Then Joli-Cœur danced a step on his own. Then we went through our entire repertoire. We didn't feel the fatigue. As for my actors, they had certainly understood that a dinner would be the payment for their pains, and they spared themselves no more than I spared myself.
Suddenly, in the middle of one of my exercises, I saw Zerbino emerge from a bush and, as his comrades passed by, he brazenly placed himself in their midst and took up his role.
While playing and watching my actors, I looked at the young boy from time to time, and, strangely enough, although he seemed to take great pleasure in our exercises, he didn't move; he just lay there in complete immobility, moving only his two hands to applaud us.
Was he paralysed? It seemed as if he was tied to a board.
Insensibly, the wind had pushed the boat against the bank on which I was standing, and I could now see the child as if I had been on the boat itself and close to him: his hair was blond, his face was pale, so pale that you could see the blue veins of his forehead under his transparent skin; his expression was sweetness and sadness, with something sickly about it.
"How much do you charge for seats at your theatre?
- You pay according to the pleasure you get out of it.
- So, Mama, you have to pay a lot," said the child.
Then he added a few words in a language I didn't understand.
"Arthur would like to see your actors up close," said the lady.
I waved to Capi, who jumped into the boat.
"And the others?" shouted Arthur.
Zerbino and Dolce followed their comrade.
"And the monkey!
Joli-Coeur would easily have made the jump, but I was never sure of him; once on board, he could indulge in jokes that might not have been to the lady's taste.
Is he bad?" she asked.
- No, ma'am, but he's not always obedient, and I'm afraid he won't behave properly.
- Well, take him on board.
Saying this, she beckoned to a man who was standing aft by the rudder; and immediately this man, passing forward, threw a plank onto the bank.
It was a bridge. He allowed me to board without risking a somersault, and I entered the boat with my harp on my shoulder and Joli-Coeur in my hand.
"The monkey! the monkey!" cried Arthur.
I approached the child and, while he petted and stroked Joli-Coeur, I was able to examine him at my leisure.
Surprisingly, he was really tied to a board, as I had thought at first.
"You have a father, don't you, my child?
- Yes, but I'm alone at the moment.
- For long?
- For two months.
- Two months! Oh, my poor little boy! How can you be alone for so long at your age!
- It has to be done, Madame!
- Your master no doubt obliges you to bring him a sum of money at the end of these two months?
- No, ma'am; he doesn't oblige me to do anything. As long as I can make a living with my troupe, that's enough.
- And have you been able to make a living so far?
I hesitated before answering; I had never seen a lady who inspired in me a feeling of respect like the one who was questioning me. However, she spoke to me with such kindness, her voice was so soft, her gaze was so affable, so encouraging, that I decided to tell the truth. Besides, why should I keep silent?
So I told him how I had had to part with Vitalis, who had been sentenced to prison for defending me, and how, since I had left Toulouse, I had not been able to earn a penny.
While I was talking, Arthur was playing with the dogs, but he listened and heard what I was saying.
"How hungry you all must be!" he exclaimed.
At this word, which they knew well, the dogs began to bark, and Joli-Cœur rubbed his belly frantically.
"Oh, Mummy," said Arthur.
The lady understood this call; she said a few words in a foreign language to a woman who was sticking her head out through a half-open door, and almost immediately this woman brought in a small table served.
"Sit down, my child," said the woman.
The dogs immediately lined up around me, and Joli-Coeur took his place on my knee.
"Do your dogs eat bread?" asked Arthur.
If they eat bread! I gave them each a piece, which they devoured.
"And the monkey?" said Arthur.
But there was no need to worry about Joli-Coeur because, while I was serving the dogs, he had grabbed a piece of pâté crust which he was choking on under the table.
I, in turn, took a slice of bread and, if I didn't choke like Joli-Cœur, I devoured it at least as gluttonously as he did.
"Poor child!" said the lady as she filled my glass.
As for Arthur, he said nothing; but he looked at us, his eyes wide, amazed at our appetite, for we were all as voracious as each other, even Zerbino, who nevertheless had to satiate himself to some extent with the meat he had stolen.
And where would you have dined this evening if we hadn't met?" asked Arthur.
- I don't think we would have had dinner.
- And where will you be dining tomorrow?
- Perhaps tomorrow we'll have the chance to meet someone as fortunate as we have today.
Without continuing to talk to me, Arthur turned to his mother, and a long conversation began between them in the foreign language I had already heard; he seemed to be asking for something that she was not prepared to grant, or at least to object to.
Suddenly he turned his head towards me again, for his body did not move.
"Do you want to stay with us?
I looked at him without answering, so surprised was I by this question.
"My son is asking you if you want to stay with us.
- On this boat!
- Yes, on this boat; my son is ill, and the doctors have ordered him to be tied to a plank, as you can see. So that he doesn't get bored, I'm taking him out on this boat. You will stay with us. Your dogs and your monkey will give performances for Arthur, who will be their audience. And you, if you please, my child, will play the harp for us. In this way you will be of service to us, and we for our part will perhaps be useful to you. You won't have to find an audience every day, which isn't always easy for a child of your age.
A few seconds' reflection made me realise how fortunate this proposal was for me, and how generous the woman who made it was.
I took the lady's hand and kissed it.
She seemed touched by this expression of gratitude, and affectionately, almost tenderly, she ran her hand over my forehead several times.
"Poor little thing!" she said.
Since I was being asked to play the harp, it seemed to me that I should not delay in complying with the request; my eagerness was to some extent a way of proving my goodwill as well as my gratitude.
I took my instrument and went to stand at the very front of the boat, then began to play.
At the same time, the lady put a small silver whistle to her lips and blew it.
I stopped playing immediately, wondering why she was whistling like that: was it to tell me I was playing badly or to shut me up?
Arthur, who could see everything going on around him, guessed my concern.
"Mum whistled to get the horses going again," he said.
The water lapped against the hull, and on either side the trees fled behind us, lit up by the slanting rays of the setting sun.
"Do you want to play?" asked Arthur.
And, nodding, calling his mother to him, he took her hand and held it in his while I played the various pieces my teacher had taught me.
XII -- My first friend
Arthur's mother was English, and her name was Mrs Milligan. She was a widow, and I thought that Arthur was her only child; but I soon learned that she had had an elder son, who had disappeared under mysterious circumstances. No trace of him had ever been found. At the time it happened, Mr Milligan was dying, and Mrs Milligan, very seriously ill, knew nothing of what was going on around her. When she came back to life, her husband was dead and her son had disappeared. The search had been led by Mr James Milligan, her brother-in-law. But there was something peculiar about this choice: Mr James Milligan had an interest opposed to that of his sister-in-law. Since his brother had died childless, he became his brother's heir.
However, Mr James Milligan did not inherit his brother's estate, for seven months after her husband's death, Mrs Milligan gave birth to a child, little Arthur.
But this child, sickly and sickly, could not live, the doctors said; he was to die at any moment, and on that day Mr James Milligan at last became heir to his elder brother's title and fortune, for the laws of inheritance are not the same in all countries, and in England they allow, in certain circumstances, for an uncle to inherit at the expense of a mother.
Mr James Milligan's hopes were therefore delayed by the birth of his nephew, but they were not destroyed; all he had to do was wait.
He waited.
But the doctors' predictions did not come true. Arthur remained sickly, but he did not die, as had been decided; his mother's care kept him alive, a miracle which, thank God, is repeated often enough.
Twenty times he was thought lost, twenty times he was saved; successively, sometimes even together, he had had all the illnesses that can befall children.
In the last few years, he had developed a terrible illness called coxalgia, which originated in the hip. Sulphurous waters had been prescribed for this ailment, and Mrs Milligan had come to the Pyrenees. But after trying the waters to no avail, another treatment was recommended, which consisted of keeping the patient lying down, without allowing him* *to set foot on the ground.
It was then that Mrs Milligan had the boat built in Bordeaux on which I had embarked.
She couldn't think of leaving her son locked up in a house, where he would have died of boredom or lack of air; Arthur could no longer walk, so the house he lived in had to work for him.
A boat had been transformed into a floating house with a bedroom, kitchen, living room and veranda. It was in this living room or under this veranda, depending on the weather, that Arthur sat from morning to night, with his mother at his side, and the landscapes flashed before him, without him having to do anything other than open his eyes.
They had left Bordeaux a month earlier and, after sailing up the Garonne, they had entered the Canal du Midi; through this canal they were to reach the ponds and canals along the Mediterranean, then sail up the Rhône, then the Saône, pass from this river into the Loire as far as Briare, take the canal of that name there, arrive in the Seine and follow the course of this river as far as Rouen, where they would embark on a large ship to return to England.
On the day of my arrival, I only got to know the room I was to occupy in the boat called Le Cygne. Although this room was very small, two metres long and about a metre wide, it was the most charming cabin, the most astonishing that a child's imagination could dream up.
The furniture in the room consisted of a single chest of drawers, but this chest of drawers resembled the inexhaustible bottle used by physicists to hold so many things. Instead of being fixed, the top shelf was movable, and when you lifted it up, you found a bed underneath, complete with mattress, pillow and blanket. Of course, the bed wasn't very wide, but it was big enough to make it very comfortable. Under the bed was a drawer with all the necessary toiletries. And under this drawer was another divided into several compartments in which linen and clothes could be stored. There were no tables, no seats, at least in the usual form, but against the partition, at the head of the bed, a board which, when lowered, formed a table, and at the foot, another which formed a chair.
A small porthole in the planking, which could be closed with a round glass, was used to light and ventilate the room.
I had never seen anything so pretty or so clean; everything was covered with varnished fir wood panelling, and the floor was covered with a black and white checked oilcloth.
But it wasn't just the eyes that were charmed.
When, after undressing, I lay down in bed, I experienced a feeling of well-being that was completely new to me.
However well I lay in that good bed, I got up at dawn, because I was worried about how my actors had spent the night.
I found everyone in the place where I had installed them the day before, sleeping as if this boat had been their home for several months.
The sailor whom I had seen the day before at the helm was already up and busy cleaning the deck; he was kind enough to put the plank ashore, and I was able to go down to the meadow with my troupe.
Playing with the dogs and with Joli-Cœur, running, jumping ditches and climbing trees, time flies; when we returned, the horses were hitched to the boat and tied to a poplar tree on the towpath: they were just waiting for a whip to set them off.
I got on board quickly; a few minutes later, the mooring rope holding the boat to the shore was cast off, the sailor took his place at the helm, the horseman mounted his horse, the pulley through which the trailer passed squeaked; we were on our way.
What a pleasure it is to travel by boat!
I was absorbed in my contemplation when I heard my name being called behind me.
I turned round quickly: it was Arthur being carried onto his board; his mother was beside him.
Did you sleep well?" asked Arthur, "better than in the fields?
I approached and replied, seeking polite words which I addressed to the mother as much as to the child.
Mrs Milligan had taken her son out of the sunlight and stood beside him.
Will you take the dogs and the monkey?" she said, "we have work to do.
I did as I was told and left with my troop, at the very front.
What kind of work was this poor little patient up to?
I saw that his mother was having him repeat a lesson, the text of which she was following in an open book.
Lying on his board, Arthur repeated without making a move.
Or, more precisely, he was trying to repeat, because he hesitated terribly and couldn't say three words fluently; and he often got it wrong.
His mother would gently but firmly correct him.
"You don't know your fable," she said.
It seemed strange to me to hear her say you to her son, for I didn't know then that the English don't use first names.
"Why do you pity me for not learning your lessons?
- I can't, Mummy, I assure you I can't."
And Arthur began to cry.
But Mrs Milligan was not moved by his tears, though she looked touched and even sorry, as she had said.
I would have let you play this morning with Remi and with the dogs," she continued, "but you will not play until you have repeated your fable to me without fail."
Saying this, she gave the book to Arthur and took a few steps, as if to return to the interior of the boat, leaving her son lying on his plank.
But she did not disappear; instead of entering the boat, she returned to her son.
"Do you want us to try and learn it together?
- Oh yes, Mum, together.
So she sat down beside him and, taking up the book again, began to read the fable, which was called The Wolf and the Young Sheep; after her, Arthur repeated the words and sentences.
When she had read the fable three times, she gave the book to Arthur, telling him to learn on his own, and returned to the boat.
Arthur immediately began to read his fable and, from where I was sitting, I could see him moving his lips.
It was obvious that he was working and applying himself.
But this application did not last long; soon he looked up from his book, and his lips moved less quickly, then suddenly they stopped altogether.
He was no longer reading or repeating.
His eyes, wandering here and there, met mine.
I beckoned him with my hand to return to his lesson.
I can't," he said, "but I'd like to.
I approached him.
That fable isn't very difficult, though," I said.
- Oh yes, quite difficult, on the contrary.
- It seemed very easy to me; and listening to your mum read it, I seem to have memorised it.
He took the book back and I began to recite; he only had to correct me three or four times.
You know it!" he exclaimed.
- Not very well, but now I think I'd say it without fail.
- How did you manage to learn it?
- I listened to your mother read it, but I listened attentively, without looking at what was happening around us.
In less than a quarter of an hour he knew it perfectly, and he was in the process of repeating it without fail when his mother came up behind us.
At first she was annoyed to see us together, because she thought we were just playing games; but Arthur didn't let her say a word.
I know it," he cried, "and he taught me.
Mrs Milligan looked at me in surprise, and was about to question me, when Arthur began, without her asking him to, to repeat The Wolf and the Young Sheep. He did so with an air of triumph and joy, without hesitation or error.
Meanwhile, I was looking at Mrs Milligan. I saw her beautiful face light up with a smile, then it seemed to me that her eyes moistened; but, as at that moment she bent over her son to kiss him tenderly, wrapping both arms around him, I don't know if she was crying.
"You're a good boy," she said.
I have recounted this little incident to illustrate the change in my position from that day on. The day before, I had been taken on as an animal trainer to entertain a sick child, myself, my dogs and my monkey; but this lesson separated me from the dogs and the monkey, and I became a comrade, almost a friend.
When I think now of the days I spent on that boat with Mrs Milligan and Arthur, they were the best days of my childhood.
Arthur had taken to me an ardent friendship, and for my part I let myself go without thinking and under the influence of sympathy to look on him as a brother: not a quarrel between us; in him not the slightest sign of the superiority that his position gave him, and in me not the slightest embarrassment; I was not even aware that I could be embarrassed.
This was undoubtedly due to my age and my ignorance of life; but it was certainly due to the delicacy and kindness of Mrs Milligan, who often spoke to me as if I had been her child.
And then this boat trip was a marvel for me; not an hour of boredom or fatigue; from morning to night, all our hours were filled.
Since the construction of the railways, people no longer visit or even know about the Canal du Midi, and yet it is one of the curiosities of France.
From Villefranche de Lauraguais we went to Avignonnet, and from Avignonnet to the stones of Naurouse, where there is a monument to the glory of Riquet, the builder of the canal, at the very spot where there is a ridge between the rivers that flow into the ocean and those that flow down to the Mediterranean.
Then we passed through Castelnaudary, the town of mills, Carcassonne, the city of the Middle Ages, and via the Fouserannes lock, so curious with its eight chambers, we descended to Béziers.
When the countryside was interesting, we only travelled a few leagues during the day; when it was monotonous, we went faster.
When the evenings were fine, I also played an active role; then I took my harp and, getting down on the ground, I went some distance away to stand behind a tree that hid me in its shade, and there I sang all the songs and played all the tunes I knew. For Arthur, it was a great pleasure to hear music in this way in the stillness of the night, without seeing the person who was making it; often he would call out to me, "Encore!" and I would repeat the tune I had just played.
It was a sweet and happy life for a child who, like me, had only left Mother Barberin's cottage to follow Signor Vitalis on the highways.
Twice I had seen the ties that bound me to those I loved broken or loosened: the first time when I had been torn away from Mother Barberin; the second when I had been separated from Vitalis; and so twice I had found myself alone in the world, without support, without back-up, having no friends other than my animals.
And now, in my isolation and distress, I had found someone who had shown me tenderness, and whom I had been able to love: a woman, a beautiful lady, gentle, affable and tender, a child of my age who treated me as if I had been his brother.
What joy, what happiness for a heart that, like mine, had such a need to love!
How often, looking at Arthur lying on his board, pale and dolent, I found myself envying his happiness, me, full of health and strength!
I didn't envy the well-being that surrounded him, it wasn't his books or his luxurious toys, it wasn't his boat, it was the love his mother showed him.
How happy he must have been to be so loved, to be kissed ten, twenty times a day, and to be able to kiss this beautiful lady, his mother, with all his heart, whose hand I hardly dared to touch when she held it out to me!
And then I thought sadly that I would never have a mother who would kiss me and whom I would kiss. Maybe one day I'd see Mother Barberin again, and that would be a great joy, but then I wouldn't be able to say to her, as I used to, "Mother", because she wasn't my mother.
Alone, I would always be alone!
This thought made me savour more intensely the joy I felt at being treated tenderly by Mrs Milligan and Arthur.
I should not be too demanding of my share of happiness in this world, and since I would never have a mother, a brother, or a family, I should be happy to have friends.
I was supposed to be happy, and in fact I was.
However, however sweet these new habits seemed to me, I soon had to interrupt them to return to the old ones.
XIII -- Foundling
Time had passed quickly during this journey, and the moment was approaching when my master would be released from prison. This was both a cause of joy and confusion for me.
The further we got from Toulouse, the more this thought tormented me.
One day I decided to tell Mrs Milligan about it and asked her how long she thought it would take me to get back to Toulouse, as I wanted to be at the prison gate just as my master passed through.
On hearing of my departure, Arthur cried out:
"I don't want Rémi to go," he cried.
I replied that I was not free in my person, that I belonged to my master, to whom my parents had rented me, and that I had to resume my service with him the day he needed me.
I spoke about my parents without saying that they weren't really my father and mother, because that would have meant admitting at the same time that I was just a foundling.
"Mum, we have to keep Rémi," continued Arthur, who, apart from work, was his mother's master and did whatever he wanted with her.
I would be very happy to keep Remi," replied Mrs Milligan, "you have taken a liking to him, and I myself have a great affection for him; but, to keep him with us, two conditions must be met, which neither you nor I can decide. The first is that Rémi wants to stay with us...
- Ah, Rémi will want to," interrupted Arthur. "Isn't it true, Rémi, that you don't want to go back to Toulouse?
- The second," continued Mrs Milligan without waiting for my reply, "is that his master agrees to relinquish his rights over him.
- Rémi, Rémi first," interrupted Arthur, pursuing his idea.
- Before answering," continued Mrs Milligan, "Rémi must reflect that it is not only a life of pleasure and walks that I am proposing to him, but also a life of work; he will have to study, take pains, remain bent over the books, follow Arthur in his studies; this must be weighed against the freedom of the highways.
- There is no balance," I said, "and I assure you, Madame, that I appreciate the value of your proposal.
- You see, Mum," cried Arthur, "Rémi is willing.
- Now," continued Mrs Milligan, "we just have to get his master's consent; for that I'm going to write to him to come and see us in Sète, as we can't go back to Toulouse. I will send him his travel expenses, and after explaining to him the reasons why we cannot take the railway, I hope he will accept my invitation. If he accepts my proposals, all that remains is for me to come to an agreement with Rémi's parents, as they too must be consulted."
Consult my parents!
But surely they would say what I wanted to remain hidden. The truth would come out. Foundling!
Then it would be Arthur, perhaps Mrs Milligan, who wouldn't want me.
I was appalled.
And I was so frightened by this truth, which I believed to be so horrible, that I came to wish fervently that Vitalis would not accept Mrs Milligan's proposal, and that nothing could be arranged between them about me.
No doubt I would have to get away from Arthur and his mother, perhaps never to see them again, but at least they would not remember me badly.
Three days after writing to my master, Mrs Milligan received a reply. In a few lines Vitalis said that he would be honoured to accept Mrs Milligan's invitation and that he would arrive in Sète the following Saturday by the two o'clock train.
I asked Mrs Milligan's permission to go to the station and, taking the dogs and Joli-Coeur with me, we waited for our master to arrive.
It was the dogs who told me that the train had arrived and that they had smelled our master. Suddenly I felt myself being pulled forward and, as I wasn't on my guard, the dogs got away from me. They ran, barking happily, and almost immediately I saw them jump around Vitalis who, in his usual costume, had just appeared. Capi, quicker but less flexible than his comrades, had leapt into his master's arms, while Zerbino and Dolce clung to his legs.
I came forward and Vitalis, placing Capi on the ground, embraced me and kissed me for the first time, repeating several times:
"Buon di, povero caro!
My master had never been hard on me, but he had never been caressing either, and I wasn't used to such expressions of affection; this moved me and brought tears to my eyes, because I was in a mood where the heart tightens and opens quickly.
I looked at him, and found that he had aged well in prison; his waist had stooped, his face had paled, and his lips were discoloured.
Well, you think I've changed, don't you, my boy?" he said to me; "prison is a bad place to be, and boredom a bad disease; but you'll be all right now.
Then changing the subject:
And this lady who wrote to me," he said, "how did you meet her?
So I told him how I had met The Swan, and how since then I had lived with Mrs Milligan and her son; what we had seen, what we had done.
And this lady is waiting for me?" he said, as we entered the hotel.
- Yes, I'll take you to her flat.
- It's no use, give me the number and stay here waiting for me, with the dogs and Joli-Coeur."
Why hadn't he wanted me to attend his interview with Mrs Milligan? That's what I asked myself, turning the question on its head. I had not yet found an answer when I saw him return.
Go and say goodbye to the lady," he said, "I'll wait for you here; we leave in ten minutes.
I was very hesitant, and yet I was overwhelmed by the meaning of this decision.
You said..." I asked.
- I said that you were useful to me and that I was useful to you; consequently, that I was not prepared to give up the rights I had over you; walk and come back."
This gave me some courage, for I was so completely under the influence of my fixed idea of being a foundling that I had imagined that, if I had to leave before ten minutes, it was because my master had said what he knew about my birth.
When I entered Mrs Milligan's flat, I found Arthur in tears and his mother bending over him to console him.
I asked your master to keep you with us," she said in a voice that brought tears to my eyes, "but he wouldn't consent, and nothing could make him.
- He's a wicked man!" cried Arthur.
- No, he's not a bad man," continued Mrs Milligan, "you're useful to him, and what's more, I think he has a real affection for you. Moreover, his words are those of an honest man and of someone above his station. This is what he said to me to explain his refusal: "I love this child, he loves me; the harsh apprenticeship of life that I am making him do near me will be more useful to him than the state of disguised domesticity in which you would make him live in spite of yourself. You would give him instruction and education, it's true; you would shape his mind, it's true, but not his character. He cannot be your son, he will be mine; that will be better than being the plaything of your sick child, however sweet and lovable that child may seem to be. I too will teach him.
- I don't want Rémi to leave.
- He has to follow his teacher, but I hope it won't be for long. We'll write to his parents, and I'll make arrangements with them.
- Oh no," I cried.
- What do you mean, no?
- Oh, no, please!
- But there's only one way, my child.
- I beg you, don't I?
It is almost certain that, had Mrs. Milligan not mentioned my parents, I should have given our farewell much more than the ten minutes granted me by my master.
"It's Chavanon, isn't it?" continued Mrs Milligan.
I jumped to my feet and ran to the door:
Arthur, I shall always love you," I said in a voice broken by sobs, "and you, madam, I shall never forget!
- Rémi! Rémi!" cried Arthur.
But I heard no more; I had gone out and closed the door.
A minute later I was with my master.
"Let's go!" he said.
And we left Sète by the road to Frontignan.
It was in this way that I left my first friend and found myself launched once again into adventures that would have spared me, had I not exaggerated the consequences of an odious prejudice and allowed myself to be panicked by a foolish fear.
XIV -- Snow and wolves
Once again I had to follow in my master's footsteps and, with the strap of my harp stretched over my aching shoulder, walk along the main roads, through rain and sun, dust and mud.
I had to play the beast in public squares and laugh or cry to amuse honourable society.
The transition was tough, because you quickly get used to well-being and happiness.
I experienced disgusts, annoyances and fatigue that I had not known before having lived for two months the sweet life of the happy people of this world.
When I was with Mrs Milligan, I often thought of Vitalis; when I was with Vitalis, I thought of Mrs Milligan.
Fortunately, in my grief, which was very keen and persistent, I had one consolation; my master was much gentler -- much more tender even -- if that word can be right, applied to Vitalis -- than he had ever been!
Often, if I had dared, I would even have kissed him, so much did I need to pour out the feelings of affection that were within me; but I did not dare, for Vitalis was not a man with whom one risked familiarity.
After leaving Sète, we had gone several days without talking about Mrs Milligan and my stay on Le Cygne; but little by little this subject came up in our conversations, my master always broaching it first, and soon hardly a day passed without Mrs Milligan's name being mentioned.
You liked her, that lady?" said Vitalis; "yes, I understand that; she was good, very good to you; you should only think of her with gratitude.
The Swan was going up the Rhône, and we were going along the banks of that river. Why shouldn't we meet him?
So as we walked, my eyes turned more often to the water than to the fertile hills and plains on either side.
When we arrived in a town, Arles, Tarascon, Avignon, Montélimar, Valence, Tournon, Vienne, my first visit was to the quays and bridges; I looked for The Swan, and when I saw a boat in the distance, half-drowned in the hazy mists, I waited for it to grow to see if it wasn't The Swan.
But it wasn't.
Sometimes I'd go so far as to ask the boatmen, and I'd describe the boat I was looking for; they hadn't seen it go by.
We stayed in Lyon for several weeks, and all the time I had to myself I spent on the quays of the Rhône and the Saône; I know the bridges of Ainay, Tilsitt, Guillotière and Hôtel-Dieu as well as any native Lyonnais.
But no matter how hard I looked, I couldn't find Le Cygne.
We had to leave Lyon and head for Dijon; then the hope of ever finding Mrs Milligan and Arthur began to desert me, for in Lyon I had studied all the maps of France I could find in the bookshops, and I knew that the Canal du Centre, which Le Cygne was to take to reach the Loire, branches off from the Saône at Chalon.
We arrived in Chalon and left without seeing Le Cygne; that was it, I had to give up my dream.
It was not without great sorrow.
To add to my despair, which was already great enough, the weather turned nasty; it was late in the season, winter was approaching, and the walks in the rain and mud were becoming increasingly difficult. When we arrived in the evening at a bad inn or in a barn, exhausted, wet down to our shirts and muddy up to our hair, I didn't go to bed with any happy thoughts.
When, after leaving Dijon, we crossed the hills of the Côte-d'Or, a damp cold chilled us to the bone, and Joli-Cœur became sadder and more sullen than I was.
My master's aim was to get to Paris as quickly as possible, because only in Paris did we have a chance of giving a few performances during the winter; but, either because the state of his purse did not allow him to take the train, or for some other reason, we had to make the journey from Dijon to Paris on foot.
When the weather permitted, we gave a short performance in the towns and villages we passed through, then, after collecting a meagre income, we set off again.
As far as Châtillon, things went more or less well, although we still had to suffer from the cold and damp; but after leaving this town, the rain stopped and the wind turned to the north.
At first we didn't complain about it, although it's not very pleasant to have the north wind in your face; on the whole, it was better to have this wind, however bitter it was, than the humidity in which we had been rotting for several weeks.
Unfortunately, the wind didn't stay dry; the sky filled up with thick black clouds, the sun disappeared completely, and everything pointed to the fact that we would soon be snowed in.
However, we managed to reach a large village without being caught in the snow, but my master's intention was to get to Troyes as quickly as possible, because Troyes is a large town where we could give several performances if the bad weather forced us to stay there.
Go to bed quickly," he told me, when we had settled into our inn; "we'll be leaving early tomorrow morning; I'm afraid we'll be surprised by the snow.
He didn't go to bed quite so early, but stayed by the hearth of the kitchen fireplace to warm Joli-Coeur, who had suffered a lot from the cold during the day and hadn't stopped moaning, even though we had taken care to wrap him in blankets.
The next morning I got up early as ordered; it was not yet daylight, the sky was black and low, without a single star; it seemed as if a great dark cover had been lowered over the earth and was about to crush it. When we opened the door, a bitter wind rushed into the fireplace and rekindled the firebrands that had been buried under the ashes the previous evening.
If I were you," said the innkeeper to my master, "I wouldn't leave; the snow is going to fall.
- I'm in a hurry," replied Vitalis, "and I hope to get to Troyes before the snow.
- Thirty kilometres can't be done in an hour.
We set off nonetheless.
Vitalis held Joli-Cœur tightly under his jacket to give him a little of his own warmth, and the dogs, happy about the dry weather, ran ahead of us; my master had bought me a sheepskin in Dijon, the wool of which was worn underneath; I wrapped myself in it, and the breeze that was blowing in our faces stuck it to my body.
It wasn't pleasant to open our mouths, so we walked in silence, hurrying as much to hurry as to warm up.
As far as the eye could see in this dark day, there were nothing but bare fields, barren hills and scorched woods.
Soon a few snowflakes, as large as butterflies, passed before our eyes; they rose, fell and swirled without touching the ground.
We hadn't come far yet, and it seemed impossible to get to Troyes before the snow fell; besides, I wasn't too worried, and I even thought that the snow would stop the north wind and ease the cold.
But I didn't know what a snowstorm was.
It wasn't long before I learned, and in such a way that I'll never forget this lesson.
The clouds coming from the north-west had approached, and a sort of white glow lit up the sky on their side; their sides had parted, it was snow.
It was no longer butterflies that fluttered before us, but a shower of snow that enveloped us.
In a few moments it had covered the road, or more precisely everything that stopped it on the road: piles of stones, grass on the verges, scrub and bushes in the ditches, because, driven by the wind which had not abated, it ran low to the ground to pile up against everything in its way.
The trouble for us was that we were among these obstacles; when it hit us, it slid over the round surfaces, but wherever there was a crack, it entered like dust and soon melted.
In a few minutes the road was covered with a thick layer of snow, through which we walked noiselessly.
The situation was not a happy one, for I have never seen snow fall, even when I was behind glass in a well-heated room, without feeling a vague sadness, and now I was thinking that the heated room must be a long way off.
However, we had to walk and not get discouraged, because our feet were sinking deeper and deeper into the layer of snow that was creeping up our legs, and because the weight on our hats was getting heavier and heavier.
Suddenly, I saw Vitalis extend his hand to the left, as if to attract my attention. I looked, and it seemed to me that I could make out a snow-covered hut made of branches in the clearing.
It was made up of faggots and logs, over which branches had been laid in the shape of a roof; and this roof was tight enough for the snow not to have got through.
It was a shelter as good as a house.
I suspected," said Vitalis, "that in this young sale there must be a woodcutter's hut somewhere; now the snow can fall.
- Yes, let it fall!" I replied defiantly.
And I went to the door, or more precisely to the opening of the hut, for it had neither door nor window, to shake off my jacket and hat so as not to get the inside of our flat wet.
The flat was quite simple, both in its construction and in its furnishings, which consisted of an earthen bench and a few large stones used as seats. But what, in the circumstances in which we found ourselves, was of even greater value to us, were five or six bricks placed in a corner and forming the fireplace.
Fire! We could make a fire.
While I lay on my two hands and blew out the fire, the dogs sat around the hearth, their necks outstretched and their bottoms gravely wet and icy, exposed to the glow of the flame.
Soon Joli-Cœur pulled aside his master's jacket and, cautiously putting the tip of his nose outside, looked to see where he was; reassured by his examination, he jumped to the ground quickly and, taking the best place in front of the fire, presented his two trembling little hands to the flame.
We were now assured of not freezing to death, but the question of hunger was not resolved.
In this hospitable hut, there was neither a bread hutch nor a stove with singing pans.
Fortunately, our master was a man of precaution and experience; in the morning, before I had risen, he had put together his provisions for the journey: a loaf of bread and a small piece of cheese; but this was not the time to be demanding or difficult: so when we saw the loaf appear, there was a lively movement of satisfaction among us all.
Unfortunately, the portions were not large, and I was unpleasantly disappointed; instead of the whole loaf, my master only gave us half.
I don't know the way," he said, answering the question in my eyes, "and I don't know if we'll find an inn to eat at by Troyes. What's more, I don't know this forest either. All I know is that this is a densely wooded area, with immense forests adjoining one another: the forests of Chaource, Rumilly, Othe and Aumont. We may be several leagues from any habitation. We may be stuck in this cabin for a long time. We need to keep provisions for our dinner.
These were reasons that I had to understand, as I remembered our exit from Toulouse, after Vitalis's imprisonment; but they did not affect the dogs who, seeing the loaf being squeezed into the sack, when they had barely eaten, stretched out their paws to their master, scratched his knees, and engaged in an expressive pantomime to make him open the sack on which they cast their imploring eyes.
Prayers and caresses were useless, the bag did not open.
However, however frugal this light meal had been, it had comforted us; we were sheltered, the fire penetrated us with a gentle warmth; we could wait for the snow to stop falling.
Through the opening in our hut we could see the snowflakes coming down fast and thick; as it was no longer windy, they fell straight down, one on top of the other, without interruption.
We couldn't see the sky, and the light, instead of coming down from above, was rising from below, from the dazzling blanket that covered the earth.
The dogs had taken their leave of this forced halt, and the three of them had settled down in front of the fire, one lying in a circle, the other on his side, Capi with his nose in the ashes, and were sleeping.
I had got up early, and it would be more pleasant to travel to the land of dreams, perhaps on The Swan, than to look at this snow.
I don't know how long I slept; when I woke up the snow had stopped falling, I looked outside; the layer that had piled up in front of our hut had increased considerably; if I had to set off again, I'd be knee-deep in it.
What time was it?
I couldn't ask the master, because in recent months his mediocre income had not replaced the money that prison and his trial had cost him, so much so that in Dijon, in order to buy my sheepskin and various items for him and for me, he had had to sell his watch, the big silver watch on which I had seen Capi tell the time when Vitalis had recruited me into the troupe.
It was the day to tell me what I could no longer ask of our good big watch.
But nothing outside could give me an answer: below, on the ground, a dazzling white line; above and in the air a dark fog; in the sky a confused glow, with here and there dirty yellow tints.
None of this indicated what time of day it was.
As I stood in the doorway, marvelling at this spectacle, I heard my master call out to me.
Do you feel like setting off again?" he said.
- I don't know, I don't feel like it; I'll do what you want us to do.
- Well, my advice is to stay here, where we at least have shelter and fire.
I thought that we hardly had any bread, but I kept my thoughts to myself.
I think the snow will start up again soon," Vitalis continued, "so we mustn't expose ourselves on the road without knowing how far we are from the houses. The night would not be pleasant in the middle of this snow; it would be better to spend it here, at least our feet would be dry.
Leaving aside the question of food, this arrangement had nothing to displease me; and besides, if we set off again straight away, it was by no means certain that we would be able, before evening, to find an inn where to dine, while it was only too obvious that we would find on the road a layer of snow which, not having yet been trodden, would be painful for walking.
We would have to huddle together in our hut, that's all.
This is what happened when, for our dinner, Vitalis divided what was left of the loaf between six of us.
Alas! there was so little left, and how quickly that little was dispatched, even though we made the pieces as small as possible in order to prolong our meal!
When our poor dinner, so meagre and so short, was over, I thought the dogs were going to start their lunchtime merry-go-round again, for it was obvious that they were still terribly hungry. But it was not to be, and I saw once again how keen their intelligence was. The snow had been falling for a long time and it was still falling with the same persistence; hour by hour you could see the layer it formed on the ground rising along the young trees, only the stems of which were still emerging from the white tide that would soon engulf them.
But when our dinner was over, we began to lose sight of what was going on outside the hut, for on this dark day darkness came quickly.
Sleep," said Vitalis, "I'll wake you when I want to sleep too, because although we have nothing to fear from animals or people in this hut, one of us has to keep an eye on the fire; we have to take precautions against the cold, which can become bitter if the snow stops.
I didn't make myself repeat the invitation twice, and I fell asleep.
When my master woke me up, it must have been late at night, or so I thought. The snow had stopped falling and our fire was still burning.
Now it's your turn", Vitalis said to me, "all you have to do is put some wood on the fire from time to time; you can see that I've stocked it for you".
Indeed, a heap of bundles was piled up within easy reach. My master, who slept much more lightly than I did, didn't want me to wake him up by fetching a piece of wood from our wall whenever I needed it, and he had prepared this pile for me, from which all I had to do was to take it quietly.
This was undoubtedly a wise precaution, but alas, it did not have the consequences that Vitalis expected.
My master was sleeping peacefully; the dogs and Joli-Coeur were also asleep, and from the bright hearth rose beautiful flames that swirled up to the roof, throwing off sparkling sparks that alone disturbed the silence.
For quite a long time I enjoyed watching these sparks, but little by little I grew weary and numb without realising it.
Suddenly I was woken up by a furious barking.
It was dark; I'd probably slept for a long time, and the fire had gone out, or at least there were no more flames to light up the hut.
The barking continued: it was Capi's voice; but, strangely enough, neither Zerbino nor Dolce answered their comrade.
Well, what?" cried Vitalis, also waking up, "what's going on?
- I don't know what's the matter.
- You've fallen asleep and the fire is going out.
Just as we were about to leave, a tremendous howl burst through the silence, and Capi threw himself back into our legs, frightened.
"They are wolves; where are Zerbino and Dolce?
I couldn't answer that. No doubt the two dogs had gone out while I was asleep.
Had the wolves taken them? It seemed to me that my master's accent, when he asked where they were, betrayed this fear.
Take a firebrand," he said, "and let's go to their rescue.
I had heard frightening stories of wolves in my village, but I didn't hesitate; I armed myself with a firebrand and followed my master. But when we reached the clearing, we saw neither dogs nor wolves. All we could see on the snow were the tracks made by the two dogs.
"Search, search, Capi", said my master, and at the same time he whistled for Zerbino and Dolce.
But there was no response to his barking, no noise disturbed the gloomy silence of the forest, and Capi, instead of searching as he was ordered to do, stayed with us, showing clear signs of worry and fear, he who was usually as obedient as he was brave.
Again Vitalis whistled, and in a loud voice called for Zerbino and Dolce.
We listened; the silence continued; my heart sank.
Poor Zerbino! Poor Dolce!
Vitalis made my fears clear.
If they haven't answered my call, it's because they're far away," he said; "and then we mustn't risk the wolves attacking us; we have nothing to defend ourselves with.
It was terrible to abandon these two poor dogs, these two comrades, these two friends, especially for me, as I felt responsible for their fault; if I hadn't slept, they wouldn't have got out.
In the hut, a new surprise awaited us; in our absence, the branches I had piled on the fire had lit up and were blazing, casting their glow in the darkest corners.
I didn't see Joli-Coeur.
His blanket had remained in front of the fire, but it was flat and the monkey wasn't under it.
I called for him; Vitalis called for him too, but he didn't show up.
What had become of him?
Vitalis told me that when he'd woken up he'd felt it near him, so had it disappeared since we'd left?
Had he wanted to follow us?
Vitalis seemed exasperated, while I was genuinely sorry.
Poor Joli-Coeur!
As I asked my master if he thought the wolves might have taken him too, he said: "No," he said:
No," he said, "the wolves wouldn't have dared to enter the lit hut; I think they would have jumped on Zerbino and Dolce who had gone out, but they didn't get in here. It is probable that Joli-Coeur, frightened, will have hidden somewhere while we were outside; and that is what worries me for him, because, in this abominable weather, he will catch cold, and for him the cold would be fatal."
And he sat down in front of the fire with his head between his two hands.
I didn't dare disturb him. I remained motionless beside him, only moving to put branches on the fire. From time to time he would get up to go to the door; then he would look up at the sky and bend down to listen; then he would come back and take his place. It seemed to me that I would have preferred to be scolded by him rather than to see him so glum and despondent.
As soon as the cold light of the morning had given the bushes and trees their true forms, we went outside. Vitalis had armed himself with a strong stick, and I had taken one as well.
Capi no longer seemed to be under the impression of fear that had paralysed him during the night; his eyes were on those of his master and he was only waiting for a sign to rush forward.
As we searched the ground for Joli-Coeur's footprints, Capi raised his head and started barking happily; this meant that we had to look in the air and not on the ground.
Indeed, we saw that the snow covering our hut had been trampled here and there, up to a large branch leaning over our roof.
We followed this branch, which belonged to a large oak, and at the very top of the tree, nestling in a fork, we saw a small dark-coloured form.
It was Joli-Coeur, and it was not hard to guess what had happened: frightened by the howling of the dogs and wolves, Joli-Coeur, instead of staying by the fire, had leapt onto the roof of our hut when we left, and from there climbed to the top of the oak, where, finding himself safe, he remained huddled, without answering our calls. The poor little animal, so cold, must have been freezing.
My master called him softly, but he didn't move any more than if he were dead.
For several minutes, Vitalis repeated his calls; Joli-Coeur gave no sign of life.
I had to make up for my negligence of the night.
If you like," I said, "I'll go and fetch him.
- You'll break your neck.
- There's no danger."
The tree was big, and what's more it was covered in snow in the parts of its trunk and branches that had been exposed to the wind.
Fortunately I had learnt to climb trees early on, and had acquired remarkable strength in this art. A few small branches had grown here and there along the trunk; I used them as rungs and, although I was blinded by the snow my hands were blowing into my eyes, I soon reached the first fork, helped by Vitalis. Once there, the climb became easy; all I had to do was make sure I didn't slip on the snow.
As I climbed, I spoke softly to Joli-Coeur, who didn't move, but looked at me with his eyes shining.
I was just about to reach him and was already stretching out my hand to take him, when he leapt up and ran onto another branch.
I followed him onto this branch, but men, and even children, are far inferior to monkeys when it comes to running through trees. So it is quite likely that I would never have been able to reach Joli-Coeur if the snow had not covered the branches; but, as the snow made his hands and feet wet, he soon tired of the chase. So, tumbling from branch to branch, he leapt onto his master's shoulders and hid under his master's jacket.
It was great to have found Joli-Coeur, but that wasn't all; now we had to look for the dogs.
In a few steps we reached the place where we had come during the night and found the snow trampled underfoot.
Now that it was daylight, it was easy for us to guess what had happened; the snow had the story of the dogs' death imprinted on it.
As they left the hut one after the other, they had walked along the faggots, and we could clearly follow their tracks for about twenty metres. Then these tracks disappeared into the shattered snow, and we saw other tracks: on one side, those showing where the wolves had jumped on the dogs in a few long leaps; and on the other, those showing where they had carried them off after having bolted. There were no more traces of the dogs, except for a red trail that here and there bloodied the snow.
"Poor Zerbino, poor Dolce, poor friends!
These were the words that we both muttered to each other, or at least the thoughts of our hearts.
They had been our comrades, our companions in good and bad fortune, and for me, during my days of distress and solitude, my friends, almost my children.
And I was guilty of their deaths.
If I had been on guard as I should have been, if I hadn't fallen asleep, they wouldn't have come out, and the wolves wouldn't have attacked us in our hut, they would have been kept at a distance, frightened by our fire.
I would have liked Vitalis to scold me; I would almost have asked him to beat me.
But he didn't say anything to me, he hardly even looked at me; he just kept his head bent over the fire; no doubt he was thinking about what would happen to us without the dogs. How could we give our performances without them? How would we live?
XV -- Monsieur Joli-Cœur
The sun shone in a cloudless sky and its pale rays were reflected by the immaculate snow; the forest, sad and livid the day before, was now dazzling with a brilliance that blinded the eyes.
From time to time Vitalis put his hand under the blanket to feel Joli-Coeur, but he wasn't getting any warmer, and when I leaned over him I could hear him shivering.
It soon became clear that we could not warm his cold blood in his veins in this way.
We have to get to a village," said Vitalis, rising to his feet, "or Joli-Coeur will die here; we'll be lucky if he doesn't die on the way. Let's go."
The blanket was warmed up and Joli-Coeur was wrapped in it, and my master placed him under his jacket against his chest.
We had to call Capi, who had remained on the threshold of the hut, his nose turned towards the place where his comrades had been surprised.
Ten minutes after arriving on the main road, we passed a carriage whose driver told us that before an hour we would find a village. This gave us legs, but walking was as difficult as it was painful, in the middle of this snow in which I was halfway through my body.
From time to time, I asked Vitalis how Joli-Coeur was, and he replied that he always felt him shivering against him.
Finally, at the bottom of a hill, the white roofs of a large village came into view.
We were not in the habit of going down to the best inns, those which, by their opulent appearance, promised good food and lodging; on the contrary, we usually stopped at the entrance to villages or on the outskirts of towns, choosing some poor house from which we would not be turned away, and where our purse would not be emptied.
But this time it wasn't like that: instead of stopping at the entrance to the village, Vitalis continued on to an inn in front of which hung a beautiful gilded sign; through the kitchen door, which was wide open, we could see a table laden with meats, and on a wide stove several red copper saucepans were singing merrily, throwing up little clouds of steam to the ceiling; from the street, we could breathe in a good smell of greasy soup which tickled our hungry stomachs nicely.
My master, having put on his "gentlemanly" airs, went into the kitchen and, with his hat on his head and his neck stretched back, asked the innkeeper for a good room with a fire.
At first the innkeeper, who was a handsome character, had disdained to look at us; but my master's great airs imposed himself on him, and a maid on duty was ordered to take us.
"Quick, lie down," Vitalis said to me while the maid lit the fire.
While I lay motionless under the quilt, trying to keep warm, Vitalis, to the astonishment of the maid, turned poor Joli-Coeur over and over as if he wanted to roast him.
Are you warm?" asked Vitalis after a few moments.
- I'm suffocating.
- That's just what I need.
And, coming to me quickly, he put Joli-Coeur in my bed, advising me to hold him close to my chest. \\
The poor little beast, who was usually so reluctant to do anything he didn't like, seemed resigned to everything. She held herself close to me, without making a move; she was no longer cold, her body was burning.
My master had gone down to the kitchen; he soon came back up carrying a bowl of hot, sweet wine.
He wanted to give Joli-Coeur a few spoonfuls of the drink, but Joli-Coeur couldn't loosen his teeth.
With shining eyes he looked at us sadly, as if begging us not to torment him.
At the same time he took one of his arms out of bed and held it out to us.
I wondered what this gesture meant, when Vitalis explained it to me.
Before I had joined the troupe, Joli-Cœur had had a fluxion of the chest, and his arm had been bled; now, feeling ill again, he was holding out his arm to us so that we could bleed him again and cure him as we had cured him the first time.
Not only was Vitalis touched, but he was also worried.
It was obvious that poor Joli-Coeur was ill, and he had to be feeling very ill to refuse the sweet wine he liked so much.
Drink the wine," said Vitalis, "and stay in bed, I'll go and fetch a doctor.
Fearing that this powerful character would not want to bother about a monkey, Vitalis had not said for which patient he was calling him; so, seeing me in bed, red as a peony about to open, the doctor came to me and, having laid his hand on my forehead:
"Congestion," he said.
Without answering, I lifted the blanket a little and, pointing to Joli-Coeur who had put his little arm around my neck, said: "He's the one who's ill:
"He's the one who's ill," I said.
The doctor had taken two steps back and turned to Vitalis.
A monkey!" he shouted, "how could you have disturbed me for a monkey in weather like this?
I thought he was going to leave indignantly.
But our master was a clever man who did not lose his head easily. Politely and with his airs and graces, he stopped the doctor. Then he explained the situation to him: how we had been surprised by the snow, and how, out of fear of the wolves, Joli-Coeur had fled to an oak tree where the cold had frozen him.
While our master was talking, Joli-Coeur, who had no doubt guessed that this bespectacled figure was a doctor, had more than ten times put out his little arm, to offer it to be bled.
"See how clever this monkey is; he knows you're a doctor, and he's holding out his arm for you to feel his pulse.
This convinced the doctor.
By the way," he said, "this may be a curious case.
It was, alas! very sad for us, and very worrying: poor Mr Joli-Coeur was threatened with a fluxion of the chest.
The little arm that he had so often stretched out was taken by the doctor, and the lancet was thrust into his vein, without him uttering the slightest moan. He knew this would cure him.
After the bloodletting came sinapisms, poultices, potions and herbal teas. I had become a nurse under Vitalis.
One morning, on my way back from lunch, while I was staying with Joli-Coeur, whom we didn't leave alone, he told me that the innkeeper had asked for payment of what we owed, so that after this payment he only had fifty sous left.
For him, there was only one way of getting out of this predicament, and that was to give a performance that very evening.
A performance without Zerbino, without Dolce, without Joli-Coeur! that seemed impossible to me.
However, my master, without dwelling on the matter, got busy.
While I was looking after our patient, he found a theatre in the covered market, as an open-air performance was impossible in the cold. He composed and pasted posters; he arranged a theatre with a few boards, and bravely spent his fifty cents on candles, which he cut down the middle to double his lighting.
Through the bedroom window, I could see him coming and going in the snow, passing and repassing in front of our inn, and it was not without anxiety that I wondered what the programme of this performance would be. I soon found out, because the village drummer, wearing a red kepi, stopped in front of the inn and, after a magnificent roll, read out the programme.
What it was, we can easily imagine when we know that Vitalis had lavished the most extravagant promises: there was talk of "an artist famous the world over" -- that was Capi -- and of "a young singer who was a prodigy" -- the prodigy was me.
When he heard the drum, Capi barked happily, and Joli-Coeur half rose, although he was very ill at the moment; both of them, I believe, had guessed that it was about our performance.
This idea, which had occurred to me, was soon confirmed by Joli-Cœur's pantomime: he wanted to get up, and I had to restrain him by force; then he asked me for his English general's costume,* * the red suit and trousers trimmed with gold, the hat with its plume.
He put his hands together and got down on his knees to beg me.
When he realised that he wasn't getting anything from me by praying, he tried anger, then finally tears.
He was certain that we would have great difficulty in persuading him to give up his idea of resuming his role in the evening, and I thought that in the circumstances it would be best to hide our departure from him.
Unfortunately, when Vitalis, who was unaware of what had happened in his absence, returned, the first thing he said was to tell me to prepare my harp and all the accessories necessary for our performance.
The time had come for us to go to the market; I arranged a good fire in the chimney with large logs that should last a long time; I wrapped poor little Joli-Coeur, who was crying his eyes out and kissing me as much as he could, in his blanket, and then we set off.
As we walked through the snow, my master explained what he expected of me.
There could be no question of our ordinary plays, since our main actors were missing, but Capi and I would have to give all we had of our zeal and talent. We had to make forty francs.
Forty francs! that was the terrible part.
Everything had been prepared by Vitalis, and all we had to do was light the candles; but that was a luxury we should only indulge in when the auditorium was more or less full, as our illumination had to be finished before the performance.
Finally my master decided that we should start, even though the hall was far from full; but we couldn't wait any longer, driven as we were by the terrible question of candles.
It was up to me to appear first on the stage, and accompanying myself on my harp I sang two ditties. To be honest, I have to say that the applause I received was rather sparse.
Capi was happier; he was applauded several times, and loudly.
The performance continued; thanks to Capi, it ended to great applause; not only did people clap their hands, they stomped their feet.
The decisive moment had arrived. While on stage, accompanied by Vitalis, I danced a Spanish step, Capi, with his begging bowl in his mouth, went through all the ranks of the assembly. Would he pick up the forty francs? was the question that gripped my heart, while I smiled at the audience with my most pleasant face.
At last I saw him appear, and I was about to stop, when Vitalis beckoned me to continue. I continued, and as I got closer to Capi, I saw that the begging bowl was not full.
At this point Vitalis, who had also judged the recipe, stood up:
"I think I can say, without flattering ourselves, that we have carried out our programme; however, as our candles are still alive, I will, if the company so desires, sing a few tunes for them; Capi will do another round, and the people who couldn't find the opening to their pocket, on his first visit, will perhaps be more skilful this time; I warn them to prepare themselves in advance."
Although Vitalis had been my teacher, I had never really heard him sing, or at least as he sang that evening.
He chose two arias that everyone knew, but that I didn't know at the time, Joseph's romance: "À peine au sortir de l'enfance", and Richard the Lionheart's: "O Richard, O my king!
At the time I was not in a position to judge whether the singing was good or bad, artful or artless; but what I can say is the feeling that his way of singing provoked in me; in the corner of the stage where I had withdrawn, I burst into tears.
Through the fog that obscured my eyes, I saw a young lady in the front pew applauding with all her might. I had already noticed her, because she wasn't a peasant like those in the audience: she was a real lady, young and beautiful, and from her fur coat I judged her to be the richest woman in the village. Next to her was a child who had also applauded Capi a lot; her son, no doubt, because he bore a strong resemblance to her.
After the first romance, Capi began his quest again, and I was surprised to see that the beautiful lady had not put anything in the begging bowl.
When my master had finished Richard's tune, she waved her hand at me and I approached her.
"I would like to speak to your master," she said.
I was a little surprised that this beautiful lady wanted to speak to my master. In my opinion, she would have done better to put her offering in the begging bowl; however, I went to convey this desire to Vitalis, and in the meantime, Capi returned to us. The second quest had been even less productive than the first.
What does this lady want?" asked Vitalis.
- To talk to you.
- I've got nothing to say to her.
- She didn't give Capi anything; maybe she wants to give it to him now.
- So it's up to Capi to go to her and not to me.
But he made up his mind, taking Capi with him.
I followed them.
In the meantime a servant, carrying a lantern and a blanket, had come and stood by the lady and the child.
Vitalis had approached and waved, but coldly.
Forgive me for disturbing you," said the lady, "but I wanted to congratulate you.
Vitalis bowed without replying a single word.
I am a musician," continued the lady, "which tells you how much I appreciate a great talent like yours.
Great talent in my master, in Vitalis, the street singer, the animal entertainer!
There's no talent in an old man like me," said Vitalis.
- Don't think I'm driven by indiscreet curiosity," said the lady.
- You were surprised, weren't you, to hear a dog showman singing?
- Astonished.
- It's quite simple though; I wasn't always what I am now; once, in my youth, a long time ago, I was... yes, I was the servant of a great singer, and by imitation, like a parrot, I began to repeat a few tunes that my master was studying in front of me; that's all."
The lady did not reply, but she looked long enough at Vitalis, who stood before her in an embarrassed attitude.
Goodbye, sir," she said, pressing the word sir, which she pronounced with a strange intonation; "goodbye, and once again let me thank you for the emotion I have just felt.
Then, stooping towards Capi, she put a gold coin in the bottle.
I thought Vitalis was going to escort the lady away, but he did not, and when she had gone a few paces, I heard him mutter two or three Italian swearwords in a low voice.
"But she gave Capi a louis," I said.
I thought he was going to slap me on the back, but he stopped with his hand raised.
A louis," he said, as if coming out of a dream, "ah yes, that's true, poor Joli-Coeur, I'd forgotten him, let's go and join him.
Our housework was quickly done, and we were soon back at the inn.
I climbed the stairs first and ran into the room; the fire was not out, but it was no longer burning. I quickly lit a candle and looked for Joli-Coeur, surprised not to hear him.
He was lying full length on his blanket, dressed in his general's uniform, and he seemed to be asleep.
I leaned over him to take his hand gently without waking him. It was a cold hand.
Just then Vitalis entered the room. I turned to him.
"Joli-Coeur is cold!
Vitalis leaned close to me:
Alas!" he said, "he is dead. It was bound to happen. You see, Rémi, perhaps I wasn't right to take you away from Mrs Milligan. It's as if I were being punished for a fault. Zerbino, Dolce... Today Joli-Coeur. This is not the end.
XVI -- Entering Paris
We were still a long way from Paris.
We had to set off along snow-covered roads and walk from morning to evening against the north wind that was blowing in our faces.
How sad those long stages were! Vitalis took the lead, I came behind him, and Capi walked at my heels.
We'd walk in line, a line that wasn't long, without exchanging a single word for hours on end, our faces blued by the wind, our feet wet, our stomachs empty; and the people we passed would stop to watch us go by.
Kilometre after kilometre, stage after stage, we approached Paris, and even if the milestones planted along the road hadn't warned me, I would have noticed from the traffic, which had become more active, and also from the colour of the snow covering the road, which was much dirtier than in the plains of Champagne.
What were we going to do in Paris, especially in the state of misery in which we found ourselves?
This was the question I asked myself anxiously and which often occupied my mind during these long walks.
I would have liked to question Vitalis, but I didn't dare, so sombre was he and, in his communications, so brief.
One day at last he deigned to take a seat beside me, and from the way he looked at me I felt that I was about to learn what I had so often wanted to know.
It was one morning, we had slept in a farmhouse a short distance from a large village, which, the blue road signs said, was called Boissy-Saint-Léger. We had set off early, that is to say at dawn, and, after skirting the walls of a park and crossing the length of the village of Boissy-Saint-Léger, we had seen, from the top of a hill, a great cloud of black vapour hovering over an immense town, of which only a few tall monuments could be made out.
I was opening my eyes to try to recognise myself in the midst of this confusion of roofs, steeples and towers, lost in mists and smoke, when Vitalis, slowing his pace, came and stood beside me.
There goes our life," he said, as if continuing a conversation that had been going on for a long time; "in four hours we'll be in Paris.
- Is that Paris stretching out over there?
- Of course it is.
Vitalis continued:
"In Paris we shall part.
I turned my eyes towards Vitalis. He himself looked at me, and the paleness of my face and the trembling of my lips told him what was going on inside me.
Now you're worried," he said, "and sad too, I think.
- I said at last, after the first moment of shock had passed.
- Poor little thing!
This word and especially the tone in which it was spoken brought tears to my eyes; it had been so long since I had heard a word of sympathy!
But," I said timidly, "you don't want to abandon me in Paris?
- No, of course not; I don't want to abandon you, believe me. What would you do in Paris, all alone, poor boy? Besides, I don't have the right to abandon you, tell yourself that. The day I didn't want to hand you over to the care of this good lady who wanted to take care of you and bring you up as her son, I took on the obligation of bringing you up myself as best I could. Unfortunately, circumstances are against me. I can't do anything for you at the moment, and that's why I'm thinking of separating us, not for ever, but for a few months, so that we can live separately during the last months of the bad season. We'll be arriving in Paris in a few hours. What do you expect us to do there with a troop reduced to just Capi?
Vitalis stopped for a moment to run his hand over his head.
You too," he said, "are a good dog; but you can't live on kindness in this world; you need kindness to make those around you happy, but you also need something else, and we don't have that. What do you want us to do with Capi alone? You do understand, don't you, that we can't give performances now?
- It's true.
-- So here's what I've been thinking about, and what I've decided. I will give you until the end of the winter to a padrone who will enrol you with other children to play the harp."
Vitalis didn't give me time to interrupt.
As for me," he continued, "I'll be giving harp, pira and violin lessons to Italian children working in the streets of Paris. I'm well known in Paris, where I've stayed several times, and where I came from when I arrived in your village; all I have to do is ask for lessons to find more than I can give. We'll live, but each on our own. Then, while I'm giving my lessons, I'll be busy training two dogs to replace Zerbino and Dolce. I'll train them further, and in the spring we'll both be able to set off again, my little Rémi, never to leave each other again, because fortune is not always bad for those who have the courage to fight. It is precisely courage that I am asking of you at the moment, and also resignation. Later, things will get better; this is just a moment to pass. In the spring we will resume our free existence. I'll take you to Germany and England. You're getting bigger and your mind is opening up. I will teach you many things and make a man of you. I made that promise to Mrs Milligan. I shall keep it. I've already started to teach you English, French and Italian with these journeys in mind; that's already something for a child of your age, not to mention the fact that you're now vigorous. You'll see, my little Rémi, you'll see, all is not lost.
On our runs through the villages and towns, I'd met several of these padrones who lead the children they've hired here and there, beating them with sticks.
They were nothing like Vitalis, harsh, unjust, demanding, drunkards, with insults and rudeness in their mouths and their hands always raised.
I could end up with one of these terrible bosses. And then, even if chance gave me a good one, it was still a change.
After my nurse, Vitalis.
After Vitalis, another.
Would it always be like this? Would I ever find someone to love forever?
Little by little I'd come to love Vitalis like a father.
So I would never have a father;
Never a family;
Always alone in the world;
Always lost on this vast earth, where I could settle nowhere!
There were many things I could have said, and my heart was full of words, but I held them back.
My master had asked me for courage and resignation. I wanted to obey him and not add to his grief.
Already, moreover, he was no longer by my side, and, as if afraid to hear what he anticipated I would say, he had resumed his walk a few paces ahead.
Soon the countryside stopped, and we found ourselves in a street whose end we could not see; on either side, in the distance, houses, but poor, dirty, and much less beautiful than those in Bordeaux, Toulouse and Lyon.
The snow had been piled up from place to place, and on these hard black heaps had been thrown ashes, rotten vegetables and rubbish of all kinds; the air was full of foul smells, the children playing outside the doors looked pale; every now and then heavy cars passed by, which they avoided with great skill and without seeming to care.
Where are we?" I asked Vitalis.
- In Paris, my boy.
- In Paris!
Was it possible, that was Paris!
Was this the Paris I had so longed to see?
Alas, yes, and it was there that I was to spend the winter, separated from Vitalis and Capi.
XVII -- A padrone in the rue de Lourcine
Although everything around us seemed horrible, I opened my eyes and almost forgot the gravity of my situation to look around me.
The further we drove into Paris, the less I saw that matched my childish reveries and imaginative hopes: the streams remained frozen; the mud, mixed with snow and icicles, was blacker and blacker, and where it was liquid, it jumped under the wheels of the cars in thick slabs, which stuck against the shopfronts and windows of the houses occupied by poor, dirty shops.
Paris was definitely not Bordeaux.
After walking for quite a long time in a wide street that was less miserable than the ones we had just crossed, and where the shops became bigger and more beautiful as we went down, Vitalis turned right, and soon we found ourselves in a quite miserable district: the tall, black houses seemed to meet at the top; the unfrozen stream ran down the middle of the street, and, without caring about the stinking water it carried, a compact crowd trampled on the greasy pavement. I had never seen faces as pale as those of the people who made up this crowd; nor had I ever seen such boldness as that of the children who came and went among the passers-by. In the cabarets, of which there were many, there were men and women drinking standing in front of pewter counters, shouting loudly.
On the corner of one house I read the name of the rue de Lourcine.
Vitalis, who seemed to know where he was going, gently pushed aside the groups that were in his way, and I followed him closely.
"Be careful not to lose me", he said.
But the recommendation was useless, I was following at his heels, and to be on the safe side I was holding one of the corners of his jacket in my hand.
After crossing a large courtyard and a passageway, we came to a sort of dark, greenish well where the sun had certainly never shone. It was even uglier and more frightening than anything I had seen before.
Is Garofoli at home?" asked Vitalis to a man who was hanging rags against the wall, shining a lantern on himself.
- I don't know, go up and see for yourself; you know where, at the top of the stairs, the door opposite.
-- Garofoli is the padrone I told you about," he said as I climbed the stairs, whose steps, covered with a crust of earth, were slippery as if they had been dug out of damp clay; "this is where he lives.
The street, the house, the stairs, were not likely to lift my heart. What would the master be?
The staircase had four flights; Vitalis, without knocking, pushed open the door facing the landing, and we found ourselves in a large room, a sort of vast attic. In the middle was a large empty space, surrounded by a dozen beds. The walls and ceiling were of an indefinable colour; they had once been white, but smoke, dust and dirt of all kinds had blackened the plaster, which in places was pitted or perforated; next to a head drawn in charcoal, flowers and birds had been carved.
Garofoli," said Vitalis as he entered, "are you in some corner? I don't see anyone; answer me, please; it's Vitalis speaking to you."
Indeed, the room seemed deserted, as far as could be judged by the light of a quinquet hanging on the wall; but to my master's voice a weak and dolorous voice, a child's voice, replied:
"Signor Garofoli has gone out; he won't be back for another two hours.
At the same time the man who had answered us came into view: he was a child of about ten years old; he shuffled towards us, and I was so struck by his strange appearance that I can still see him in front of me: he had, so to speak, no body, and his large and disproportionate head seemed to rest immediately on his legs; this head had a profound expression of pain and gentleness, with resignation in his eyes and despair in his general physiognomy. Thus built, he could not be handsome; yet he drew the eye and held it by the sympathy and a certain charm which came from his large wet eyes, tender as a dog's, and from his speaking lips.
Are you quite sure he'll be back in two hours?" asked Vitalis.
- Quite sure, signor; it's dinner time, and no one serves dinner but him.
- Well, if he comes back before then, tell him that Vitalis will be back in two hours.
- In two hours, yes, signor.
I was about to follow my master when he stopped me.
Stay here," he said, "rest and I'll be back.
And as I made a frightened movement:
"I assure you I'll be back.
Despite my tiredness, I would have preferred to follow Vitalis, but I was used to obeying his orders, so I stayed.
When the sound of my master's heavy footsteps could no longer be heard on the stairs, the child, who had been listening with his ear to the door, turned back to me.
"Are you from the country?" he said in Italian.
Since I had been with Vitalis, I had learnt enough Italian to understand almost everything that was said in that language, but I did not yet speak it well enough to use it willingly.
"I'm French.
- Ah, so much the better!
- Do you like the French better than the Italians?
- No, and it is not for myself that I say so much the better, it is for you, because, if you were Italian, you would probably come here to be in the service of signor Garofoli; and one does not say so much the better to those who enter the service of the signor padrone."
These words were not likely to reassure me.
"Is he bad?
The child did not answer this direct question, but the look he fixed on me was frighteningly eloquent. Then, as if he did not wish to continue a conversation on this subject, he turned his back on me and walked towards a large fireplace which occupied the far end of the room.
A good fire of demolition wood was burning in this fireplace, and in front of it a large cast-iron pot was boiling.
I approached the chimney to warm myself, and noticed that there was something peculiar about the pot that I hadn't noticed at first. The lid, topped by a narrow tube through which the steam escaped, was attached to the pot by a hinge on one side and a padlock on the other.
"Why is it padlocked?
- So that I can't take a cup of broth. I'm in charge of making the soup, but the master doesn't trust me."
I couldn't help smiling.
You're laughing," he continued sadly, "because you think I'm greedy. If you were me, you might be just as greedy. It is true that I am not greedy, but hungry, and the smell of the soup escaping through this tube makes my hunger even more cruel.
- So Signor Garofoli is letting you starve to death?
- If you enter his service here, you'll know that people don't die of hunger, only suffer from it. Me especially, because it's a punishment.
- Punishment! Starving to death.
- Yes; besides, I can tell you all about it; if Garofoli becomes your master, my example may serve you well. Signor Garofoli is my uncle and he took me in out of charity. You must know that my mother is a widow and, as you can imagine, she is not rich. When Garofoli came to the country last year to take in children, he offered to take me with him. It cost my mother a lot to let me go, but you know, when you have to, and I had to, because there were six children at home and I was the eldest. I was alone with Garofoli when I left home, but after eight days there were a dozen of us and we set off for France. In Paris a selection was made from among us; those who were strong were placed with smokers or master chimney sweeps; those who were not strong enough for a trade went to sing or play the hurdy-gurdy in the streets. Of course, I wasn't strong enough to work, and it seems I was too ugly to have a good day playing the hurdy-gurdy. So Garofoli gave me two little white mice to show under doors in the passages, and he charged me thirty sous for the day. As many pennies as you miss in the evening," he told me, "as many strokes of the stick for you. Thirty cents is hard to collect; but canings are also hard to receive, especially when Garofoli is administering them. So I did everything I could to collect my money, but despite my efforts, I didn't often succeed. My comrades almost always had their money when they came home, but I hardly ever had it. Garofoli, seeing that beating me did nothing, used another method. For every penny you miss, I'll keep a potato for your supper," he told me. Since your skin is hard to the blows, your stomach will perhaps be tender to hunger. After a month or six weeks on that diet, I hadn't put on any weight; I'd gone pale, so pale that I often heard people around me say: "There's a child who's going to starve to death. Then suffering did what beauty had not wanted to do: it made me interesting and gave me eyes; the people in the neighbourhood took pity on me, and if I didn't collect much more money, I sometimes collected a piece of bread, sometimes soup. Those were my good days; I didn't get beaten up any more, and if I didn't have potatoes for supper, I didn't care when I had something for my dinner. But one day Garofoli saw me at a dairy eating a plate of soup, and he understood why I put up with the deprivation of potatoes without complaining. So he decided that I would no longer go out and that I would stay in the barracks to prepare the soup and do the housework. But, as I could eat while preparing the soup, he invented this pot. Every morning, before going out, he puts the meat and vegetables in the pot, locks the lid, and all I have to do is boil the pot; I can smell the broth, and that's all; as for taking any, you understand that, through this narrow little tube, it's impossible. It's since I've been in the kitchen that I've become so pale; the smell of broth doesn't nourish you, it just makes you hungrier, that's all. Am I all right, and there's no mirror here?
I was not then a very experienced mind, however I knew that one should not frighten those who are ill by telling them that one finds them ill.
You don't look any paler to me than anyone else," I replied.
- I can see that you say that to reassure me, but I would like to be very pale, because that would mean that I was very ill, and I would like to be completely ill.
I looked at him in amazement.
You don't understand me," he said with a smile, "but it's quite simple. When you're very ill, they either cure you or let you die. If I'm left to die, that'll be the end of it, I won't be hungry any more, I won't get beaten up any more; and then they say that those who have died live in heaven; then, from inside heaven, I'd see Mum over there, in the country, and by talking to the Good Lord I might be able to prevent my sister Cristina from being unhappy: by praying to him properly. If they take care of me, they'll send me to hospital, and I'll be happy to go to hospital.
I had an instinctive fear of the hospital, and very often on the way, when overwhelmed with fatigue I had felt faint, I had only to think of the hospital to find myself immediately ready to walk; I was astonished to hear Mattia speak thus:
"If you only knew how good it is to be in hospital," he said, continuing, "I've already been there, to Sainte-Eugénie; there's a doctor there, a tall blond man, who always has barley sugar in his pocket, it's broken, because broken costs less, but it's no less good for that; and then the nuns speak softly to you: 'Do that, my little one; stick out your tongue, poor thing. I like being spoken to gently, it makes me want to cry, it makes me all happy. Silly, isn't it? But Mum always spoke softly to me. Sisters talk just like Mum did, and if it's not the same words, it's the same music. And then, when you start to feel better, good broth and wine. Let's see, now, honestly, do I look very pale?
Saying this, he came and stood in front of me and looked me in the eye. I no longer had the same reasons for keeping silent, but I didn't dare answer him sincerely and tell him what a frightening sensation his big burning eyes, his sunken cheeks and his discoloured lips gave me.
"I think you are ill enough to go to hospital.
- At last!"
And with his shaky leg he tried to curtsy. But almost immediately, moving to the table, he began to wipe it.
"Garofoli will be back soon and nothing will be ready; since you think I've got what I need in the way of blows to get into the hospice, there's no point in getting any more: those would be lost; and now the ones I'm getting seem harder than the ones I got a few months ago. They're good, aren't they, those who say you get used to everything?
As he spoke, he hobbled around the table, putting the plates and cutlery in place. I counted twenty plates: so that was twenty children that Garofoli had under his direction; as I could only see twelve beds, we had to sleep two together. What beds! No sheets, but russet blankets that must have been bought in a stable, when they were no longer warm enough for the horses.
Is it everywhere like here?" I said in horror.
- Where, everywhere?
- Everywhere where there are children.
- I don't know, I've never been anywhere else; only you try to go somewhere else.
- Where to?
- I don't know; anywhere would be better than here.
Anywhere; it was vague, and in any case how could I go about changing Vitalis's decision?
He was holding a violin under his arm, and in his free hand he was carrying a large piece of demolition wood. This piece, similar to those I had seen placed in the fireplace, made me understand where Garofoli got his supplies and the price he paid for them.
"Give me your piece of wood", said Mattia, going to meet the newcomer.
But the latter, instead of giving the piece of wood to his comrade, passed it behind his back.
Oh no," he said.
- Give it to me, the soup will be better.
- If you think I brought it for the soup: I've only got thirty-six pennies, I'm counting on him not to make Garofoli charge me too much for the four pennies I'm short.
- There's no piece that fits; you'll pay them, go on; each to his turn."
Mattia said this unkindly, as if he was happy about the beating that awaited his comrade. I was surprised by this flash of harshness in such a gentle face; it was only later that I understood that by living with the wicked you can become wicked yourself.
It was time for all Garofoli's pupils to return to school; after the child with the piece of wood came another, and after that one ten more. As they entered, each one went to hang his instrument on a nail above his bed, this one a violin, that one a harp, another a flute, or a piva; those who were not musicians, but simply animal entertainers, stuffed their marmots or their Barbary pigs into a cage.
A heavier step sounded on the staircase, and I sensed that it was Garofoli; and I saw a small man enter, with a feverish face and a hesitant gait; he was not wearing Italian costume, but he was dressed in a grey overcoat.
His first glance was at me, a glance that made my heart chill.
"What kind of a boy is he?" he said.
Mattia replied quickly and politely, giving him the explanations Vitalis had asked for.
Ah, Vitalis is in Paris," he said, "what does he want with me?
- I don't know," replied Mattia.
- I'm not talking to you, I'm talking to this boy.
-- The padrone will come," I said, not daring to answer frankly; "he'll tell you himself what he wants.
- Here's a boy who knows the price of words; you're not Italian?
- No, I'm French.
Two children had approached Garofoli as soon as he entered, and both were standing next to him waiting for him to finish speaking. What did they want with him? I soon got an answer to the question I had been asking myself with curiosity
From the gravity and respect with which they carried out these simple acts of life, you would have thought they were two altar boys hurrying religiously around the officiant; I could see from this how much Garofoli was feared, for it was certainly not tenderness that made them act in such a hurry.
When Garofoli was seated, another child hurriedly brought him a pipe filled with tobacco and at the same time a fourth presented him with a lighted match.
Now," said Garofoli when he was seated and his pipe had begun to burn, "what about our accounts, my little angels? Mattia, the book?
It was really a great kindness of Garofoli's to deign to speak, for his pupils watched his desires or intentions so closely that they guessed them before he expressed them.
He had not asked for his account book when Mattia placed a small, filthy register in front of him.
Garofoli made a sign, and the child who had presented him with the match approached.
"You owe me a penny from yesterday, and you promised to pay it back today; how much are you bringing me?"
The child hesitated for a long time before answering; he was crimson.
"I'm a penny short.
- Ah! you're short your penny, and you tell me that calmly!
- It's not yesterday's penny, it's a penny for today.
- So it's two pennies? You know I've never seen anything like you.
- I'm not to blame.
- No nonsense, you know the rule: undo your jacket, two for yesterday, two for today; and no potatoes for your audacity; Riccardo, my sweet, you've earned this recreation by your kindness; take the straps."
Riccardo took down from the wall a whip with a short handle ending in two leather straps with big knots. Meanwhile, the man who was a penny short was undoing his jacket and dropping his shirt so that he was naked from the waist down.
Wait a minute," said Garofoli with a wicked smile, "you might not be alone, and it's always a pleasure to have company, and Riccardo won't have to do it over and over again.
Standing in front of their master, the children stood motionless; at this cruel joke, they all laughed together with a forced laugh.
The one who laughed the loudest," said Garofoli, "is, I'm sure, the one who is missing the most. Who laughed out loud?
They all pointed to the one who had arrived first with a piece of wood.
Come on, how much are you missing?" asked Garofoli.
- It's not my fault.
- From now on, whoever answers: 'It's not my fault', will receive a strap in addition to what is owed to him; how much are you short?
- I brought a piece of wood, this beautiful piece.
- That's something; but go to the baker and ask him for some bread in exchange for your piece of wood, will he give you any? How many pennies are you short? Come on, speak up!
- I've made thirty-six pennies.
- You're four pennies short, you miserable scoundrel, four pennies! and you're back in front of me! Riccardo, you're a lucky rascal, my sweet, you're going to have a good time; off with your jacket!
- But what about the piece of wood?
- I'll give it to you for dinner.
This stupid joke made all the children who had not been convicted laugh.
During this interrogation, about ten children appeared: they all came in turn to give their accounts; along with two already sentenced to the straps, there were three others who didn't have their numbers.
Riccardo held the whip in his hand, and the five patients were lined up next to him.
You know, Riccardo," said Garofoli, "that I'm not looking at you because these beatings hurt me, but I can hear you, and from the noise I'll be able to judge the strength of the blows.
And he turned his nose towards the fire, as if it were impossible for him to see this execution. As for me, forgotten in a corner, I shuddered with indignation and also with fear. This was the man who was to become my master; if I didn't bring back the thirty or forty cents he would like to demand from me, I would have to turn my back on Riccardo. Ah, now I understood how Mattia could speak of death so calmly and hopefully.
The first crack of the whip against my skin brought tears to my eyes. I thought I'd forgotten, so I didn't force myself, but I was wrong. Garofoli was watching me surreptitiously, as I soon found out.
"He's not like you brigands, who laugh at the misfortune of your comrades and at my grief; why shouldn't he be one of your comrades, you could use him as an example!
This word made me tremble from head to toe: their comrade!
At the second crack of the whip, the patient gave a pitiful groan, and at the third a heart-rending cry.
Garofoli raised his hand, Riccardo remained with the whip suspended.
I thought he wanted to show mercy, but it wasn't a question of mercy.
You know how much screaming hurts me," Garofoli said softly, addressing his victim, "you know that if the whip tears your skin, your screams tear my heart. So I'm warning you that for every scream you'll get another lash, and that'll be your fault. Don't make me sick with grief; if you had a little tenderness for me, a little gratitude, you'd keep quiet. Come on, Riccardo!
He raised his arm and the straps struck the unfortunate man on the back.
"Mamma! mamma!" he cried.
Fortunately I saw no more of it, the door to the staircase opened and Vitalis entered.
One look made him realise what the cries he had heard coming up the stairs had already told him; he ran to Riccardo and snatched the whip from his hand; then, turning sharply towards Garofoli, he stood in front of him with folded arms.
All this had happened so quickly that Garofoli was stunned for a moment, but soon recovered and resumed his gentle smile:
Isn't it terrible," he said, "this child has no heart.
- It's a disgrace!" cried Vitalis.
- Precisely my point," interrupted Garofoli.
- Don't make faces at me," continued my master forcefully, "you know very well that I'm not talking to this child, but to you; yes, it's a disgrace, a cowardice, to martyr children who can't defend themselves.
- What are you meddling with, you old fool?
- Something to do with the police.
- The police," exclaimed Garofoli, rising to his feet, "are you threatening me with the police?
-- Yes, I am," replied my master, undaunted by the padrone's fury.
-- Listen, Vitalis," said the latter, calming himself and taking on a mocking tone, "you mustn't be mean and threaten me with trouble, because I could well be trouble too. And then who wouldn't be happy? Of course I'm not going to tell the police anything, your affairs are none of their business. But there are others who are interested, and if I were to tell them what I know, if I were to say just one name, just one name, who would be obliged to hide their shame?
My master remained silent for a moment. His shame? I was stunned. Before I had recovered from the surprise into which these strange words had thrown me, he had taken my hand.
"Follow me".
And he led me towards the door.
Well," said Garofoli, laughing, "no hard feelings, old chap; you wanted to talk to me?
- I have nothing more to say to you.
And without a word, without turning round, he went down the stairs, still holding my hand. How relieved I was to follow him! I had escaped from Garofoli; if I had dared, I would have embraced Vitalis.
XVIII -- The quarries of Gentilly
As long as we were in the street where there were people, Vitalis walked without saying a word, but soon we found ourselves in a deserted alley; then he sat down on a bollard and passed his hand over his forehead several times, which with him was a sign of embarrassment.
It may be nice to listen to generosity," he said, as if talking to himself, "but here we are, on the streets of Paris, without a penny in our pockets and without a morsel of bread in our stomachs. Are you hungry?
- I haven't eaten anything since the little crouton you gave me this morning.
- Well, my poor child, you're going to bed without supper tonight; if only we knew where to sleep!
- So you were planning to sleep at Garofoli's?
- I was counting on you sleeping there, and as he gave me about twenty francs for your winter, I was off the hook for the time being. But, seeing how he treats children, I couldn't control myself. You didn't want to stay with him, did you?
- Oh, you're good.
- The heart is not quite dead in the old vagabond. Unfortunately, the vagabond had calculated well, and the heart disturbed everything. Now where to?
It was already late, and the cold, which had eased during the day, had become bitter and icy again; the wind was blowing from the north, and the night would be hard.
Vitalis sat on the pillar for a long time, while Capi and I stood motionless in front of him, waiting for him to make up his mind. Finally, he stood up.
"Where are we going?
- To Gentilly, to try and find a quarry where I once slept. Are you tired?
- I had a rest at Garofoli's.
- The bad thing is that I didn't rest and I can't take it any more. At last, we have to go. Forward, my children!
These were his good-humoured words for the dogs and for me; but that evening he said them sadly.
Without uttering a single word, Vitalis bent double and walked forward; despite the cold, his hand burned mine; it seemed to me that he was trembling. Sometimes, when he stops to lean on my shoulder for a minute, I feel his whole body jerk convulsively.
Usually I didn't dare question him too much, but this time I broke my rule; I felt the need to tell him that I loved him, or at least that I wanted to do something for him.
You're ill!" I said in a moment's pause.
- I'm afraid so; in any case, I'm tired; these days of marching have been too long for my age, and the cold of tonight is too harsh for my old blood; I should have had a good bed, a supper in a closed room and in front of a good fire. But it's all a dream; let's go, children!
Although it was dark and the paths crossed at every step, Vitalis walked like a man who knows where he's going and is perfectly sure of his route; so I followed him without fear of getting lost, having no other worry than that of knowing if we weren't going to reach this quarry at last.
But suddenly he stopped.
"Do you see a bunch of trees?
- I don't see anything.
- Can't you see a black mass? Let's walk on for another five minutes, and if we don't see the trees we'll go back; I'll have taken a wrong turn.
Now that I realised that we could be lost, I no longer felt strong. Vitalis pulled me by the arm.
When you see ruts, let me know," said Vitalis; "the right path must be on the left, with a thorn-head at the crossroads.
We walked on for a few more minutes, then it seemed to me that I saw a path that cut across ours, and at the corner of this path a black body that must have been the thorn-head. I let go of Vitalis' hand to move forward more quickly. The path was cut by deep ruts.
"There's the thorn; there are ruts.
- Give me your hand; we're saved, the quarry is five minutes from here; look carefully, you must see the clump of trees.
- Yes, there, on the left.
- And the ruts?
- There aren't any.
- Let's walk straight through the trees and give me your hand.
- There's a wall.
- It's a pile of stones.
- No, I assure you it's a wall.
What I was saying was easy to verify, we were only a few steps from the wall; Vitalis took those few steps, and, as if he didn't trust his eyes, he put both hands against the obstacle that I called a wall and that he called a pile of stones.
"It's a wall all right; the stones are evenly arranged and I can smell the mortar; the quarry is walled up.
- Walled in?
- They've closed the opening and it's impossible to get in.
- But then what?
- I don't know; to die here.
- Oh, master.
- Yes, you don't want to die, you're young, you've got life, so let's walk. Can you walk?
- Can you?
- When I can't, I'll fall like an old horse.
- Where should we go?
- Back to Paris; when we meet the sergeants, we'll be taken to the police station; I'd have liked to avoid that, but I don't want to let you freeze to death; come on, my little Rémi, come on, my child, cheer up!
And we set off again in the opposite direction along the road we had already travelled. What time was it? I had no idea. We had walked for a long, long time and slowly. Midnight, maybe one o'clock in the morning. The sky was still the same dark blue, with no moon and a few stars that seemed smaller than usual. Far from calming down, the wind had increased in strength, kicking up whirlwinds of snowy dust on the side of the road and whipping it in our faces. The houses we passed were closed and without light; it seemed to me that, if the people sleeping there warmly in their sheets had known how cold we were, they would have opened their doors to us. We could have fought off the cold by walking fast, but Vitalis could only move forward with great difficulty, gasping for breath; his breathing was high and panting as if he had been running. When I questioned him, he didn't answer me, and slowly waved his hand to indicate that he couldn't speak.
From the countryside we had come back to the city, which meant that we were walking between walls, at the top of which, here and there, a lamppost was swinging with a noise of scrap metal.
Vitalis stopped; I realised he was at his wits' end.
"Would you like me to knock on one of those doors?
- No, they wouldn't let us in; they're gardeners and market gardeners who live there; they don't get up at night. Let's keep walking.
But he had more willpower than strength. After a few steps he stopped again.
I've got to rest a bit," he said, "I can't take it any more.
A door opened in a palisade, and above this palisade stood a large heap of manure set straight up, as is so often seen in market-gardens; the wind, blowing over the heap, had dried out the first bed of straw and scattered a fairly thick layer of it in the street, at the very foot of the palisade.
I'll sit here," said Vitalis.
- You said that if we sat down we'd be caught by the cold and wouldn't be able to get up again.
Without answering me, he motioned to me to pick up the straw against the door, and he let himself fall onto this litter rather than sit down on it; his teeth were chattering and his whole body was shaking.
Bring more straw," he said, "the dung heap will shelter us from the wind.
Sheltered from the wind, that was true, but not from the cold. When I had gathered all the straw I could, I came and sat down next to Vitalis.
Close to me," he said, "and put Capi on top of you, he'll give you some of his warmth.
Vitalis was a man of experience, who knew that the cold, in the conditions we were in, could become lethal. For him to expose himself to this danger, he had to be destroyed.
He really was. For the last fortnight, he had gone to bed every evening having done more than he could manage, and this latest fatigue, coming after all the others, found him too weak to bear it, exhausted by a long series of efforts, by deprivation and by age.
Was he aware of his condition? I never knew. But the moment I pulled the straw over me and pressed myself against him, I felt him bend over my face and kiss me. It was the second time; it was the last.
A slight chill prevents sleep in people who go to bed shivering; a great, prolonged chill strikes with numbness and stupor those whom it seizes in the open air. This was our case.
No sooner had I snuggled up to Vitalis than I was shattered and my eyes closed. I made an effort to open them and, as I could not, I pinched my arm hard; but my skin was insensitive, and it was hardly possible, despite all the good will I put into it, to hurt myself a little. However, the jolt restored some of my consciousness. Vitalis, with his back against the door, was gasping for breath in short, rapid gasps. In my legs, leaning against my chest, Capi was already asleep. Above our heads, the wind was still blowing, covering us with wisps of straw that fell on us like dry leaves from a tree. There was no one in the street; near us, far away, all around us, a deadly silence.
I didn't realise what it was, but it was a vague fear, mixed with a sadness that filled my eyes with tears. It seemed to me that I was going to die there.
And the thought of death took me back to Chavanon. Poor Mama Barberin! to die without seeing her again, without seeing our house, my garden! And, by some extravagance of the imagination, I found myself back in that garden: the sun was shining, cheerful and warm; the daffodils were opening their golden flowers, the blackbirds were singing in the bushes, and, on the thorn hedge, Mother Barberin was hanging out the washing she had just done in the stream that sang over the pebbles.
Suddenly my mind went from Chavanon to Le Cygne: Arthur was asleep in his bed; Mrs Milligan was awake and, as she could hear the wind blowing, she wondered where I was in the cold.
Then my eyes closed again, my heart went numb, and I seemed to faint.
XIX -- Lise
When I woke up I was in bed; the flame of a large fire lit up the room where I was lying.
I looked around me.
I didn't know this room.
Nor did I know the people around me: a man in a grey jacket and yellow clogs; three or four children, including a little girl of five or six who stared at me with astonished eyes; those eyes were strange, they spoke.
I stood up.
They hurried around me.
Vitalis?" I said.
- He's asking for his father," said a young girl who seemed to be the eldest of the children.
- He's not my father, he's my master; where is he? Where is Capi?
Had Vitalis been my father, they would no doubt have been careful to tell me about him; but, as he was only my master, they decided that all they had to do was tell me the truth, and this is what they told me.
The door we had huddled in was a gardener's door. At about two in the morning, the gardener had opened the door to go to the market and found us lying under our straw blanket. First they told us to get up so that the carriage could pass; then, as neither of us moved, and Capi was the only one to respond by barking in our defence, they took us by the arm to shake us off. We didn't move any further. So we thought something serious was going on. A lantern was brought in; the result of the examination was that Vitalis was dead, dead of cold, and that I wasn't much better than him. However, thanks to Capi lying on my chest, I had retained a little warmth in my heart, so I had resisted and was still breathing. I was then taken to the gardener's house and laid down in the bed of one of the children who had been made to get up. I lay there for six hours, more or less dead; then the circulation of the blood was restored, my breathing regained its strength, and I had just woken up.
As numb and paralysed as I was in body and mind, I nevertheless found myself awake enough to understand the full extent of the words I had just heard. Vitalis dead!
It was the man in the grey jacket, the gardener, who was telling me this story, and as he spoke, the little girl with the astonished look never took her eyes off me. When her father said that Vitalis was dead, she undoubtedly understood, she sensed with a quick intuition the blow that this news dealt me, because, leaving her corner, she came towards her father, placed a hand on his arm and pointed to me with the other hand, making a strange sound that was not human speech, but something like a soft and compassionate sigh.
Moreover, the gesture was so eloquent that it did not need to be backed up by words; I felt an instinctive sympathy in this gesture and in the look that accompanied it, and, for the first time since my separation from Arthur, I experienced an indefinable feeling of trust and tenderness, as in the days when Mother Barberin looked at me before kissing me. Vitalis was dead, I was abandoned, and yet it seemed to me that I was not alone, as if he had still been there with me.
Well, yes, my little Lise," said the father, leaning towards his daughter, "it hurts her, but we have to tell her the truth; if it's not us, it'll be the police.
And he went on to tell me how the town sergeants had been warned and how Vitalis had been taken away by them while I was being put into bed with Alexis, his eldest son.
And Capi?" I said, when he had stopped talking.
- Capi!
- Yes, the dog?
- I don't know, he's disappeared.
- He followed the stretcher," said one of the children.
- Did you see him, Benjamin?
- I think so, he was walking on the heels of the porters, head down, and from time to time he jumped on the stretcher; then, when he was lowered, he let out a plaintive cry, like a muffled howl. "
Poor Capi! he who had so often, as a good comedian, followed the funeral of Zerbino for laughs, putting on a mournful face, heaving sighs that made the darkest children swoon...
The gardener and his children left me alone and, without really knowing what I was going to do, I got up.
My harp had been placed at the foot of the bed on which I had been laid, I slung it over my shoulder and entered the room where the gardener had entered with his children. I had to leave, but where would I go?... I wasn't aware of it, but I felt I had to go... Besides, dead or alive, I wanted to see Vitalis again, and I left.
When I woke up in bed, I didn't feel too bad, just achy and with an unbearable heat in my head; but when I got on my legs, I felt like I was going to fall, and I had to hold on to a chair. However, after a moment's rest, I pushed open the door and found myself in the presence of the gardener and his children.
They were sitting at a table, next to a fire blazing in a high chimney, eating a good cabbage soup.
The smell of the soup stirred my heart and reminded me suddenly that I hadn't had dinner the night before; I fainted and staggered. My unease showed on my face.
"Are you feeling unwell, my boy?" asked the gardener in a sympathetic voice.
I replied that I was indeed not feeling well and that, if they would let me, I would sit by the fire for a while.
But it wasn't warmth I needed, it was food; the fire didn't make me feel any better, and the smell of the soup, the sound of the spoons on the plates, the clapping of the tongues of those who were eating, only increased my weakness.
If I had dared, how I would have asked for a plate of soup! But Vitalis hadn't taught me to hold out my hand, and nature hadn't made me a beggar; I would rather have died of hunger than said "I'm hungry". I don't really know why, except that I've never wanted to ask for more than I could give back.
The little girl with the strange look, the one who didn't speak and whom her father had called Lise, was opposite me, and instead of eating she looked at me without lowering her eyes or looking away. Suddenly she got up from the table and, taking her plate full of soup, brought it to me and put it between my knees.
Weakly, for I had no voice left to speak, I waved my hand to thank her, but her father didn't let me.
Accept, my boy," he said, "what Lise gives is well given; and if you feel like it, after this one, another.
If I felt like it! The plate of soup was gobbled up in a few seconds. When I put my spoon down again, Lise, who had been standing in front of me staring at me, let out a little cry that was no longer a sigh this time, but an exclamation of contentment. Then, taking the plate from me, she handed it to her father to fill and, when it was full, she handed it back to me with a smile so gentle, so encouraging that, despite my hunger, I remained for a moment without thinking of taking the plate.
As on the first occasion, the soup quickly disappeared; it was no longer a smile that puckered the lips of the children watching me, but real laughter that filled their mouths and lips.
Well, my boy," said the gardener, "you're a pretty spoon.
I felt myself blushing all the way to my hair, but after a moment I thought it was better to admit the truth than to let myself be accused of gluttony, and I replied that I hadn't had any dinner the night before.
"And breakfast?
- Not breakfast either.
- And your master?
- He hadn't eaten any more than I had.
- So he died of hunger as well as cold.
The soup had given me back my strength; I got up to leave.
Where do you want to go?" said the father.
- To find Vitalis, to see him again.
- But you don't know where he is?
- I don't know where he is.
- Do you have friends in Paris?
- No, I haven't.
- People from your country?
- None.
- Where's your garni?
- We didn't have any accommodation; we arrived yesterday.
- What do you want to do?
- Play the harp, sing my songs and earn a living.
- Where?
- In Paris.
- You'd be better off going back to your country, to your parents; where do your parents live?
- I haven't got any parents.
- You said the old man with the white beard wasn't your father?
- I haven't got a father, but Vitalis was like a father to me.
- And what about your mother ?
- I haven't got a mother.
- Do you have an uncle, an aunt, cousins, anyone?
- No, no-one.
- Where did you come from?
- My master bought me from my nurse's husband. You've been good to me, for which I thank you from the bottom of my heart, and if you like, I'll come back on Sunday to make you dance and play the harp, if that amuses you.
As I spoke, I headed for the door, but I had hardly taken a few steps when Lise, who was following me, took me by the hand and showed me my harp with a smile. There was no mistaking it.
"Do you want me to play?
She nodded and clapped her hands happily.
Well, yes," said the father, "play her something.
I took up my harp and, although I was not in the mood for dancing or merriment, I began to play a waltz, my good one, the one I had in my fingers; ah! how I wished I could play as well as Vitalis and please this little girl who so gently moved my heart with her eyes!
First she listened to me, staring at me, then she marked the time with her feet, and soon, as if carried away by the music, she began to spin around in the kitchen, while her two brothers and older sister sat quietly.
Sitting by the fireplace, her father never took his eyes off her; he looked very moved and clapped his hands. When the waltz was over and I stopped, she came and sat down in front of me and curtsied. Then, immediately tapping my harp with one finger, she made a sign that meant "more".
I would have been happy to play for her all day, but her father said that was enough, because he didn't want her to get tired of playing.
So instead of playing a waltz or a dance tune, I sang my Neapolitan song that Vitalis had taught me:
Fenesta vascia e patrona crudele,
Quanta sospire m'aje fatto jettare.
M'arde stocore comm'a na cannela
Bella quanno te sento anno menarre.
At the first bars, Lise came and stood in front of me, her eyes fixed on mine, moving her lips as if she were mentally repeating my words, then, when the accent of the song became sadder, she gently took a few steps back, so that at the last stanza she threw herself crying into her father's lap.
Enough," said her father.
- How stupid she is!" said one of her brothers, the one called Benjamin, "she dances and then right away she cries.
- She's not as stupid as you are! She understands," said her elder sister, bending over her to kiss her.
While Lise threw herself into her father's lap, I put my harp over my shoulder and headed for the door.
"Where are you going?
- I told you: to try and see Vitalis again, and then to do what he taught me to do, play the harp and sing.
- So you really want to be a musician?
- I don't have any other.
- However, the night you've just spent must have given you food for thought.
- I'd certainly prefer a nice bed and a warm fire.
- Do you want that, the fireside and the good bed, with work, of course? If you want to stay, you'll work, you'll live with us. You understand, don't you, that I'm not offering you a fortune, or idleness? If you accept, you'll have to work hard, you'll have to get up in the morning, you'll have to work hard all day, you'll have to sweat for the bread you earn. But the bread will be assured, you won't have to sleep under the stars like last night, and perhaps die abandoned on the corner of a bollard or at the bottom of a ditch; in the evening you'll find your bed ready and, eating your soup, you'll have the satisfaction of having earned it, which makes it good, I assure you. And finally, if you're a good boy, and I have a feeling you are, you'll have a family with us.
Lise had turned round and, through her tears, was looking at me with a smile.
Surprised by this proposal, I remained undecided for a moment, not quite realising what I was hearing.
Well," said the father, returning to his proposal, "does that suit you, my boy?
A family!
So I'd have a family! Ah, how many times had this long cherished dream vanished! I had missed Mother Barberin, Mrs Milligan, Vitalis, one after the other.
I would no longer be alone.
I had just seen the death of a man with whom I had lived for several years and who had been almost like a father to me. At the same time I had lost my companion, my comrade, my friend, my good and dear Capi whom I loved so much and who had also befriended me so much.
So it wasn't all over for me; life could begin again.
I quickly lifted the strap of my harp over my shoulder.
Here's an answer," said my father, laughing, "and a good one at that, as you can see. Hang your instrument on this nail, my boy, and the day you don't feel comfortable with us, you'll take it back to fly away; only you'll be careful to do as the swallows and nightingales do, you'll choose your season to set off.
- I'll only go out once," I told him, "to look for Vitalis.
- That's too right", replied the good man.
The house we had come to knock down belonged to the Glacière, and the gardener who occupied it was called Acquin. At the time I was welcomed into the house, the family consisted of five people: the father, known as Father Pierre; two boys, Alexis and Benjamin, and two girls, Étiennette, the eldest, and Lise, the youngest.
Lise was mute, but not born mute, in other words, she was not deaf as a result of being mute. For two years she had spoken, then suddenly, just before reaching her fourth year, she lost the use of speech. Fortunately, this accident, which occurred as a result of convulsions, had not affected her intelligence, which on the contrary had developed with extraordinary precocity; not only did she understand everything, but she also said and expressed everything. In poor families, and even in many other families, it all too often happens that a child's infirmity is a cause of abandonment or repulsion. But this had not happened to Lise, who, with her kindness and vivacity, her gentle disposition and her expansive goodness, had escaped this fate. Her brothers put up with her without making her pay for her misfortune; her father thought only of her; her elder sister Étiennette adored her.
In the past, the right of birth was an advantage in noble families; today, in working-class families, it is sometimes a heavy responsibility to be the first to be born. Mrs Acquin had died a year after Lise's birth, and since then Étiennette, who was only two years older than her elder brother, had become the mother of the family. Instead of going to school, she had to stay at home, prepare the food, sew a button or a patch on her father's or her brothers' clothes, and carry Lise in her arms; they had forgotten that she was a daughter, that she was a sister, and they had quickly got into the habit of seeing her only as a servant, and a servant they didn't bother with, because they knew she wouldn't leave the house and would never get angry.
Carrying Lise on her arms, dragging Benjamin by the hand, working all day, getting up early to make his father's soup before he left for the market, going to bed late to put everything in order after supper, washing the children's clothes in the wash-house, watering in summer when she had a moment's respite, leaving her bed at night to spread the doormats in winter when the frost suddenly set in, Étiennette had no time to be a child, to play and laugh. At fourteen, her face was as sad and melancholy as that of a thirty-five-year-old spinster, though with a ray of gentleness and resignation.
It wasn't five minutes since I had hung my harp on the nail that had been designated for me, and I was in the middle of telling how we had been surprised by the cold and fatigue on our way back from Gentilly, where we had hoped to sleep in a quarry, when I heard a scratching at the door that opened onto the garden, and at the same time a plaintive bark.
"It's Capi!" I said, jumping to my feet.
But Lise warned me; she ran to the door and opened it.
Poor Capi leapt against me, and when I took him in my arms, he began to lick my face, uttering little cries of joy; his whole body was trembling.
"And Capi?" I said to Mr Acquin.
My question was understood.
"Well, Capi will stay with you.
As if he understood, the dog jumped to the ground and, putting his right paw on his heart, saluted. This made the children laugh a lot, especially Lise, and to amuse them I wanted Capi to play them a play from his repertoire; but he didn't want to obey me and, jumping on my lap, he started kissing me again; then, going downstairs, he started pulling me by the sleeve of my jacket.
"He wants me to go out, he's right.
- To take you to your master.
The policemen who had taken Vitalis had said that they needed to question me and that they would come during the day, when I was warm and awake. It was a long, uncertain wait for them. I was anxious for news of Vitalis. Perhaps he hadn't died as we'd thought. I wasn't dead. He could, like me, have come back to life.
Seeing my concern and guessing the cause, my father took me to the superintendent's office, where I was asked question after question, which I only answered when I was assured that Vitalis was dead. What I knew was quite simple, I told him. But the superintendent wanted to know more, and he questioned me at length about Vitalis and about myself. I replied that I had no parents and that Vitalis had rented me for a sum of money that he had paid in advance to my nurse's husband.
There was, however, one mysterious point I could have mentioned: it was what had happened at our last performance, when Vitalis had sung in such a way as to arouse the admiration and astonishment of the lady; there were also Garofoli's threats, but I wondered if I shouldn't keep silent about them. Should what my master had so carefully hidden during his life be revealed after his death?
But it's not easy for a child to hide something from a police commissioner who knows his job, because these people have a way of questioning you that quickly loses you when you try to escape. This is what happened to me.
In less than five minutes the superintendent had me telling him what I wanted to hide and what he wanted to know.
"Once in the Rue de Lourcine, he'll recognise the house; you'll go up with him and question Garofoli.
The three of us set off: the agent, the father and me.
As the commissioner had said, it was easy for me to recognise the house, and we went up to the fourth floor. I didn't see Mattia, who had probably gone into hospital. When Garofoli saw a police officer and recognised me, he turned pale; he was certainly afraid. But he was soon reassured when he heard from the officer what had brought us to his house.
Ah, the poor old man is dead," he said.
- Did you know him?
- Yes, I did.
- Well, tell me what you know.
- It's quite simple. His name wasn't Vitalis; it was Carlo Balzani, and if you had lived in Italy thirty-five or forty years ago, that name alone would be enough to tell you what the man you're worried about was like. Carlo Balzani was at that time the most famous singer in Italy, and his successes on our great stages were famous; he sang everywhere, in Naples, Rome, Milan, Venice, Florence, London and Paris. But there came a day when his voice was lost; then, no longer able to be the king of artists, he did not want his glory to be diminished by compromising it in theatres unworthy of his reputation. He gave up his name of Carlo Balzani and became Vitalis, hiding from all those who had known him in his heyday. However, he had to make a living; he tried his hand at several trades and failed, so that, one fall after another, he became a showman of performing dogs. But in his misery his pride remained, and he would have died of shame if the public had learned that the brilliant Carlo Balzani had become poor Vitalis. By chance I had become the master of this secret.
So that was the explanation of the mystery that had so intrigued me!
Poor Carlo Balzani, dear and admirable Vitalis! I would not have been surprised if they had told me he had been a king.
XX -- Gardener
My master was to be buried the next day, and my father had promised to take me to the funeral.
But the next day, to my great despair, I could not get up, for during the night I was seized with a great fever which began with a shiver followed by a hot flush; it seemed to me that I had fire in my chest and that I was sick like Joli-Coeur, after his night spent on the tree in the snow.
In reality, I had a violent inflammation, that is to say a fluxion of the chest caused by the chill I had felt the night my poor master had died.
It was this chest outbreak that enabled me to appreciate the kindness of the Acquin family, and especially Étiennette's qualities of devotion.
Although poor people are usually reluctant to call doctors, I was taken so violently and frighteningly that they made an exception for me to this rule, which is as much by nature as by habit. The doctor who was called didn't need a long examination and a detailed account to see what my illness was; he immediately declared that I should be taken to the hospice.
This was indeed the simplest and easiest thing to do. However, this advice was not adopted by the father.
Since he fell at our door," he said, "and not at the hospice's, we must keep him.
And, in addition to all her other occupations, Étiennette had taken on the role of nursemaid, caring for me gently and methodically, as a Sister of Saint-Vincent de Paul would have done, without ever being impatient or forgetting anything. When she was obliged to leave me to do the housework, Lise replaced her, and many a time, in my fever, I saw her at the foot of my bed, staring at me with her big, worried eyes. My mind clouded by delirium, I thought she was my guardian angel, and I spoke to her as I would have spoken to an angel, telling her my hopes and desires. It was from that moment on that I got used to thinking of her, in spite of myself, as an ideal being, surrounded by a kind of halo, whom I was surprised to see living our lives when I expected, on the contrary, to see her fly away with great white wings.
Eventually my strength returned and I was able to work in the garden. I was looking forward to this moment, because I was eager to do for others what others had done for me, to work for them and to give back to them, as far as I was able, what they had given me. I had never worked, because however hard the long walks may be, they are not continuous work that requires willpower and application; but it seemed to me that I would work well, at least courageously, following the example of those I saw around me.
I had seen the peasants working in my village, but I had no idea of the dedication, courage and intensity with which the gardeners around Paris work, who, up long before the sun comes out and in bed long after it has gone down, put their all into it and toil as long as they have strength during the long day. I had also seen how the land is cultivated, but I had no idea of what can be made of it through work, by not allowing it to rest. I was taught well by Father Acquin.
My strength came, and I also had the satisfaction of being able to put something in the ground, and the even greater satisfaction of seeing it grow. It was my own work, my own thing, my own creation, and it gave me a sense of pride: I was good at something, I could prove it, and what was even sweeter, I could feel it. That, I assure you, pays for a lot of trouble.
Despite the fatigue that this new life imposed on me, I soon got used to this industrious existence which bore so little resemblance to my vagabond existence as a gypsy. Instead of running free as I had done in the past, with nothing to do but go straight ahead on the main roads, I now had to stay shut up within the four walls of a garden, and work hard from morning to night, with my shirt wet on my back, my watering cans at the end of my arms and my bare feet on the muddy paths; but everyone around me was working just as hard; my father's watering cans were heavier than mine, and his shirt was wetter with sweat than ours. Equality is a great relief in times of sorrow. And then I found what I thought I'd lost forever: family life. I was no longer alone, no longer an abandoned child; I had my own bed, my own place at the table that brought us all together. If, during the day, Alexis or Benjamin sometimes hit me with a stick, I didn't think about it any more than they did about the ones I gave them back; and in the evening, around the soup, we were all friends and brothers.
To be fair, not everything was work and fatigue for us; we also had our hours of rest and pleasure, short, of course, but precisely because of that they were more delicious.
On Sundays, in the afternoon, we used to meet under a little grapevine cradle next to the house; I would go and take my harp from the nail where it had been hanging all week, and I would get the two brothers and the two sisters dancing. When they got tired of dancing, they'd make me sing my repertoire, and my Neapolitan song always had an irresistible effect on Lise:
Fenesta vascia e patrona crudele.
I never sang the last verse without seeing her eyes water.
Then, to distract her, I'd do a buffoonish play with Capi. For him too, those Sundays were days of celebration; they reminded him of the past, and when he'd finished his part, he'd gladly do it again.
These Sundays were also Vitalis' day for me. I played the harp and sang as if he had been there. Good Vitalis! As I grew, so did my respect for his memory. I understood better what he had meant to me.
Two years went by like that, and as my father often took me with him to the market, to the Quai aux Fleurs, to the Madeleine, to the Château-d'Eau, or to the florists to whom we took our plants, I gradually got to know Paris.
I saw the monuments, I went into some of them, I walked along the quays, on the boulevards, in the Luxembourg Gardens, in the Tuileries Gardens, in the Champs-Élysées. I saw statues. I stood in awe of the movement of the crowds. I formed a sort of idea of what it was like to live in a great capital.
Fortunately, I didn't get my education just by looking at things and following the whims of my walks and runs through Paris. Before setting himself up as a self-employed gardener, 'the father' had worked in the nurseries of the Jardin des Plantes, and there he had come into contact with people of science and learning, whose contact had given him a curiosity for reading and learning. For several years he had used his savings to buy books and his few spare hours to read them. When he got married and the children arrived, leisure time was scarce. The books had been abandoned, but they had not been lost or sold, and had been kept in a cupboard. The first winter I spent with the Acquin family was a very long one, and gardening work was slowed down for several months, if not suspended. So, to occupy the evenings we spent by the fire, old books were taken out of the cupboard and distributed among us. Most of them were books on botany and plant history, with a few travelogues thrown in. Alexis and Benjamin had not inherited their father's taste for study, and regularly every evening, after opening their volume, they fell asleep on the third or fourth page. As for me, less inclined to sleep or more curious, I read right up to the time we had to go to bed. Vitalis's early lessons had not been lost, and as I lay in bed I thought of him fondly.
My desire to learn reminded my father of the time when he used to take two pennies from his lunch to buy books, and to those in the cupboard he added a few others that he brought me from Paris. The choices were made by chance or the promises of the title; but in the end they were always books, and if they put a little disorder in my mind, without direction, this disorder faded away later, and what was good in them remained with me and has remained with me; so true is it that all reading is beneficial.
Lise didn't know how to read, but seeing me immersed in books as soon as I had an hour's freedom, she was curious to know what interested me so much. At first she wanted to take away the books that prevented me from playing with her; then, seeing that in spite of everything I kept coming back to them, she asked me to read them to her, and then to show her how to read in print. Thanks to her intelligence and in spite of her infirmity, I was able to do it with my eyes in place of my ears. But she always preferred reading aloud, which kept us both busy. It was a new bond between us. Withdrawn into herself, her mind always on the alert, not occupied by the frivolities or silliness of conversation, she must have found in reading what she found there: distraction and nourishment.
How many hours we spent like that: she sitting in front of me, never taking her eyes off me, me reading! Often I would stop when I came across words or passages I didn't understand, and I would look at her. Sometimes we'd stay looking for a long time; then, when we couldn't find what we were looking for, she'd signal to me to carry on, with a gesture that meant "later". I also taught her how to draw, which is what I called drawing. It took a long time and was difficult, but at last I got the hang of it. No doubt I was a rather poor teacher. But we got on well together, and the harmony between master and pupil is often better than talent. What a joy it was when she drew a few lines that showed what she had wanted to do! Father Acquin kissed me.
Come on," he said, laughing, "I could have made a bigger mistake than taking you on. Lise will pay for this later.
Later, that is, when she would speak, because we had not given up on giving her back her voice, only the doctors had said that for the moment there was nothing to be done and that we had to wait for a crisis.
Later was also the sad gesture she made when I sang to her. She had wanted me to teach her to play the harp, and very quickly her fingers got used to imitating mine. But of course she couldn't learn to sing, and that made her very unhappy. Many times I saw tears in her eyes that told me of her sorrow. She wiped her eyes and, with a resigned smile, gestured to me: later.
Adopted by Father Acquin and treated as a brother by the children, I would probably have remained forever at the Glacière had it not been for a catastrophe that suddenly changed my life once again, for it was said that I would not be able to remain happy for long, and that, when I thought myself best assured of rest, it would be precisely the hour when I would be thrown back, by events beyond my control, into my adventurous life.
XXI -- The dispersed family
There were days when, finding myself alone and reflecting, I said to myself:
"You're too happy, my boy, it won't last.
I could not foresee how misfortune would come to me, but I was fairly certain that it would come one way or another.
This often made me sad; but, on the other hand, it was good that, to avoid this misfortune, I tried to do what I did as well as I could, figuring that it would be my fault that I would be hit.
It wasn't my fault, but if I was wrong about that, I was only too right about the misfortune.
The art of a gardener who works with the market in mind is to bring his flowers to market at the moment when he stands a chance of getting the highest price for them. Now, this is the time of the great festivals of the year: St Peter's Day, St Mary's Day, St Louis' Day, because there are a great many people named Peter, Mary, Louis or Louise, and consequently there are also a great many pots of flowers or bouquets sold on these days to wish a relative or friend a happy new year. On the eve of these celebrations, everyone has seen the streets of Paris full of flowers, not only in the shops and markets, but also on the pavements, on street corners, on the steps of houses, wherever there is a display.
After his wallflower season, Father Acquin worked for the big festivals in July and August, especially August, when Sainte-Marie and Saint-Louis are celebrated, and for this we prepared thousands of daisies, fuchsias and oleanders, as many as our frames and greenhouses could hold; All these plants had to arrive in flower on the appointed day, not too early, as they would have been gone by the time of the sale, nor too late, as they would not yet have been in flower. Understandably, this requires a certain amount of skill, because you can't control the sun or the weather, which can be more or less fine. Father Acquin was a master of this art, and his plants never arrived too early or too late. But what a lot of care and work!
By the time I had finished telling this story, our season was shaping up to be excellent; it was 5 August and all our plants were ready. In the garden, in the open air, the daisy queens were showing their corollas ready to bloom, and in the greenhouses or under the frames, whose glass had been carefully bleached with whitewash to filter the light, the fuchsias and oleanders were beginning to flower; they formed large bushes or pyramids topped with buds from top to bottom. The view was superb, and from time to time I could see my father rubbing his hands contentedly.
"The season will be good", he would say to his sons.
And laughing softly, he calculated how much he would earn from the sale of all those flowers.
We'd worked hard to get to this point, and without taking an hour off work, even on Sundays; however, with everything in good order, it was decided that as a reward we would all go to Arcueil for dinner on Sunday 5 August at the home of one of our father's friends, a gardener like himself; Capi himself would also be there. We would work until three or four o'clock, then, when everything was finished, we would lock the door and leave happily. We would arrive in Arcueil around five or six o'clock, then, after dinner, we would come straight back so as not to go to bed too late and be at work early on Monday, fresh and ready.
What a joy!
It was done as decided and, a few minutes before four o'clock, the father turned the key in the lock of the big door.
En route, everybody!" he said cheerfully.
- Onward, Capi!
And, taking Lise by the hand, I started to run with her, accompanied by Capi's joyful barking as he jumped around us. Perhaps he thought we were going away for a long time on the open road, which would have pleased him more than staying at home, where he was bored, because I wasn't always able to look after him - which he loved above all else.
We were all dressed up in our best clothes, eating roast dinners. People would turn round to watch us go by. I don't know about myself, but Lise, with her straw hat, blue dress and grey canvas boots, was the prettiest little girl you could ever see, the most alive. Her eyes, her quivering nostrils, her shoulders, her arms, everything about her spoke of her pleasure.
The time passed so quickly that I was unaware of it; all I know is that, as we came to the end of dinner, one of us noticed that the sky was filling up with dark clouds towards the sunset, and, as our table was served in the open air under a large elder tree, it was easy for us to see that a storm was brewing.
"Children, we must hurry back to the Glacière.
At this word, there was a general exclamation:
"Already!
- If the wind picks up," said the father, "it could capsize the panels; let's go.
There was no need to reply further; we all knew that glass panels are the fortune of gardeners, and that if the wind breaks the glass, it's ruin for them.
I'm going ahead," said the father; "come with me, Benjamin, and you too, Alexis, we'll go faster. Rémi will come behind with Étiennette and Lise.
The thunder rolled in the distance, and its rumblings drew rapidly closer, mingling with its shrill blasts.
Would we get there before the storm?
Would the father, Benjamin and Alexis arrive?
For them, the question was of quite different importance; for us, it was simply a question of not getting wet, and for them of protecting the windows from destruction, in other words closing them so that the wind couldn't get underneath them and knock them all over.
Strange! In the midst of the thunder, we heard a tremendous noise coming towards us, which was inexplicable. It seemed to be a regiment of horsemen rushing to escape the storm; but that was absurd: how could horsemen have come to this neighbourhood?
Suddenly the hail began to fall; first a few hailstones hit us in the face, then, almost instantly, a veritable avalanche; we had to throw ourselves under a large door.
And then we saw the most terrible hailstorm imaginable. The hailstones were as big as pigeon's eggs, and as they fell they made a deafening noise, occasionally breaking windows. With the hailstones sliding off the roofs into the street fell all sorts of things, pieces of tiles, plaster, crushed slates, especially slates that made black heaps amidst the whiteness of the hail.
This terrible downpour didn't last long, five or six minutes perhaps, and then it suddenly stopped just as it had started; the cloud rolled over Paris and we were able to get out from under our big door. In the street, the hard, round hailstones rolled under our feet like pebbles from the sea, and they were so thick that our feet were ankle-deep in them.
It wasn't long before we reached the house, whose large door had been left open, and we rushed into the garden.
What a sight! Everything was shattered and chopped up: panels, flowers, pieces of glass, hailstones, all in a jumble, a shapeless mess; this garden, so beautiful and rich in the morning, was nothing but nameless debris.
Where was the father?
We looked for him, seeing him nowhere, and so we came to the large greenhouse, not a single pane of glass of which had remained intact; he was sitting, slumped, as it were, on a stepladder amidst the debris that covered the ground, Alexis and Benjamin beside him motionless.
"Oh, my poor children!" he cried, raising his head at our approach, which had been signalled to him by the sound of glass crushing under our feet.
It was a disaster; but, as great as it was in the eyes, it was even more terrible in its consequences.
I soon learned from Étiennette and the boys how justified the father's despair was. It had been ten years since the father had bought this garden and built this house himself. The man who had sold him the land had also lent him money to buy the equipment he needed for his florist business. All of this was payable or repayable over fifteen years, in annual instalments. Up until then, the father had been able to pay these annual instalments regularly through hard work and hardship. These regular payments were all the more essential as his creditor was only waiting for an opportunity, in other words a delay, to take back his land, house and equipment, while keeping, of course, the ten annual instalments he had already received. This was even, it seems, his speculation, and it was because he hoped that in fifteen years there would come a day when the father would not be able to pay that he had risked this speculation, which was without danger for him - whereas it was full of danger, on the contrary, for his debtor.
That day had finally come, thanks to the hail.
Now what was going to happen?
We didn't stay in a state of uncertainty for long, and the day after the father was due to pay his annual instalment with the proceeds from the sale of the plants, we saw a gentleman in black enter the house, who didn't look too polite and who handed us a piece of stamped paper on which he wrote a few words in a blank line.
He was a bailiff.
The father didn't stay at home any more, he ran around town. Where did he go? I don't know, because he used to be so communicative, but now he doesn't say a word. He was going to business people's houses, no doubt to the courts.
Vitalis had also appeared in court, and I knew what the result had been.
One evening, the father came home even more overwhelmed than usual.
Children," he said, "it's all over.
I wanted to go out, because I realised that something serious was going to happen, and as he was talking to his children, it seemed to me that I shouldn't listen.
But he stopped me:
Aren't you one of the family?" he said, "and even though you're not old enough to hear what I have to say, you've already been tested enough by misfortune to understand it; children, I'm going to leave you.
There was only an exclamation, a cry of pain.
Lise jumped into his arms and kissed him, crying.
"I've been ordered to pay, and as I don't have the money, they're going to sell everything here; then, as that won't be enough, they'll put me in prison, where I'll stay for five years; as I can't pay with my money, I'll pay with my body, with my freedom."
There was a silence.
"You can imagine that I have not been without thinking about this, and this is what I have decided so as not to leave you alone and abandoned after I have been arrested.
A little hope returned to me.
"Rémi is going to write to my sister Catherine Suriot, at Dreuzy, in the Nièvre; he is going to explain the position to her and ask her to come; with Catherine, who does not lose her head easily, and who knows business, we will decide what is best."
Although the father's words were vague, they nevertheless contained hope, and in the position we were in, it was already a lot to hope.
But what was it?
We couldn't see it, but we hoped. Catherine was coming, and she was a woman who knew business; that was enough for simple, ignorant children like us. For those who know business, there are no more difficulties in this world.
However, she didn't arrive as soon as we had imagined, and the guards of commerce, i.e. the people who arrest debtors, arrived before her.
The father was just about to leave to go to one of his friends', when he went out into the street and found them in front of him; I went with him, and in a second we were surrounded. But the father didn't want to run away, he turned pale as if he was going to be ill and asked the guards, in a weak voice, to kiss his children.
Don't be sorry, my good man," said one of them, "prison for debt isn't as bad as all that, and there are some good boys in there.
So he kissed Étiennette, Alexis and Benjamin.
I stood in a corner, my eyes clouded with tears; he called to me:
"And you, Rémi, aren't you coming to kiss me? Aren't you my child?
And he hurried off after putting Lise's hand in Étiennette's. I wanted to follow him, and I did.
I wanted to follow him, and I headed for the door, but Étiennette motioned me to stop.
Where would I have gone? What would I have done?
We all cried, and none of us could find a word to say.
What word?
We knew that this arrest would have to take place one day or another; but we had thought that Catherine would be there then, and Catherine was the defence.
But Catherine wasn't there.
She did arrive, however, about an hour after the father's departure, and found us all in the kitchen without us having exchanged a word. Étiennette, so strong, so valiant to fight, was now as weak as we were. She no longer encouraged us, she had no willpower, no direction, all in her grief, which she repressed only to try to console Lise's grief. The pilot had fallen overboard, and we children, now without anyone at the helm, without a lighthouse to guide us, without anything to take us to port, without even knowing if there was a port for us, remained lost in the middle of the ocean of life, tossed about at the whim of the wind, incapable of a movement or an idea, fear in our minds, despair in our hearts.
She had been a nursemaid in Paris for ten years, on five different occasions; she knew the difficulties of this world, and, as she said herself, she knew how to turn around.
It was a relief for us to hear her command us and to obey her; we had regained our bearings and were back on our feet.
For a peasant woman with no education and no fortune, this was a heavy responsibility, and one that would worry even the bravest of men: a family of orphans, the eldest not yet seventeen and the youngest mute. What to do with these children? How could they be looked after when it was so hard for them to live on their own?
The father of one of the children she had fostered was a notary; she went to consult him, and it was with him, according to his advice and care, that our fate was decided. Then she went to the prison to consult with the father, and eight days after her arrival in Paris, without having once spoken to us about her actions and intentions, she informed us of the decision that had been taken.
As we were too young to continue working alone, each of the children would go to live with uncles and aunts who were willing to take them in:
Lise to Aunt Catherine in Morvan;
Alexis to an uncle who was a miner in Varses, in the Cévennes;
Benjamin with an uncle who was a gardener in Saint-Quentin.
And Étiennette with an aunt who was married in Esnandes in the Charente region by the sea.
I listened to these arrangements, waiting for them to come to me. But when Aunt Catherine had stopped talking, I stepped forward:
"What about me?
- You? But you're not family.
- I'll work for you.
- You're not family.
- Yes, he is", they all said.
Lise came forward and folded her hands in front of her aunt with a gesture that said more than long speeches.
My poor little girl," said Aunt Catherine, "I understand you well, you want him to come with you; but you see, in life, we don't do what we want. You're my niece, and when we get home, if the man says the wrong thing, or pretends to sit down at the table, all I have to say is: "She belongs to the family, so who's going to feel sorry for her but us? And what I'm telling you about us is just as true for the uncle in Saint-Quentin, for the uncle in Varses, for the aunt in Esnandes. You accept your parents, you don't welcome strangers; there's little bread for just one family, there isn't enough for everyone.
Aunt Catherine never put off carrying out her resolutions; she warned us that our separation would take place the next day, and then sent us to bed.
No sooner were we in our room than everyone surrounded me and Lise threw herself on top of me, crying. Then I realised that, despite the grief of being separated, it was me they were thinking of, it was me they felt sorry for, and I felt that I really was their brother. Then an idea dawned on my troubled mind, or, more correctly, for we must say the good as well as the bad, an inspiration from the heart came to me from the heart into the mind.
Listen," I said, "I can see that if your parents don't want me, you're making me part of your family.
- Yes," said the three of them, "you will always be our brother.
Lise, who couldn't speak, ratified these words by shaking my hand and looking at me so deeply that tears came to my eyes.
"Well, yes, I will be, and I'll prove it to you.
- Where do you want to work?
- There's a place at Pernuit's; do you want me to go and ask for it tomorrow morning for you? said Étiennette.
- I don't want to get a job; if I did, I'd stay in Paris; I wouldn't see you any more. I'll take my sheepskin back, I'll take my harp off the nail where my father put it, and I'll go from Saint-Quentin to Varses, from Varses to Esnandes, from Esnandes to Dreuzy; I'll see you all, one after the other, and so, through me, you'll always be together. I haven't forgotten my songs and dance tunes; I'll earn my living.
From the satisfaction that appeared on all the faces, I saw that my idea had fulfilled their own inspirations, and, in my grief, I felt very happy. For a long time we talked about our project, our separation, our reunion, the past and the future. Then Étiennette wanted everyone to go to bed, but no one slept well that night, and perhaps I slept even less than the others.
They had to leave at eight in the morning, and Aunt Catherine had asked for a large carriage to take them all first to the prison to kiss their father, and then each with their parcel to the railway where they were to embark.
The clock was ticking fast; another quarter of an hour, another five minutes, and we would be separated. Wouldn't Lise think of me?
Just as the carriage began to roll, she came out of Aunt Catherine's room and beckoned me to follow her into the garden.
"Lise!" called Aunt Catherine.
But Lise, without answering, hurried on.
In the gardens of florists and market gardeners, everything is sacrificed to utility, and there is no room for fancy or ornamental plants. However, in our garden there was a large Bengal rose that had not been pulled out because it was in a remote spot.
Lise went over to it and cut off a branch, then, turning to me, she divided the branch in two, which had two little buds about to blossom, and gave me one.
Oh, how little the language of the lips is compared with that of the eyes! How cold and empty words are compared with looks!
"Lise! Lise!" cried the aunt.
The parcels were already on the carriage.
I took my harp and called Capi, who, at the sight of the instrument and my old costume, which had nothing to frighten him, jumped for joy, no doubt understanding that we were about to set off again and that he could run free, which for him was more fun than staying locked up.
It was time to say goodbye. Aunt Catherine cut it short; she asked Étiennette, Alexis and Benjamin to come upstairs, and told me to put Lise on her lap.
Then, as I remained stunned, she gently pushed me away and closed the door.
"Let's go!" she said.
And the car set off.
I slung my harp over my shoulder. This movement, which I had done so often in the past, caught Capi's attention; he stood up, fixing his bright eyes on my face.
"Come on, Capi!
He had understood; he jumped in front of me barking.
I looked away from the house where I'd lived for two years, where I'd thought I'd live forever, and looked straight ahead.
The sun was high on the horizon, the sky clear, the weather warm; it hardly resembled the icy night in which I had fallen from exhaustion and fatigue at the foot of that wall.
So these two years had been no more than a halt; I had to get back on the road.
But this halt had been beneficial.
It had given me strength.
And what was even better than the strength I felt in my limbs was the friendship I felt in my heart.
I was no longer alone in the world.
I had a purpose in life: to be useful and to please those I loved and who loved me.
A new existence was opening up before me. I remembered Vitalis and said to myself: "Onwards!
Second part
I -- Forward
Forward!
The world was open before me, and I could turn my steps north or south, west or east, according to my whim.
I was only a child, and I was my master!
Alas! that was precisely the sad part of my position.
How many children say to themselves: "Oh, if only I could do as I please; if only I were free; if only I were my own master! How many long impatiently for the blessed day when they will have this freedom... to do silly things!
I used to say to myself: "Ah, if only I had someone to advise me, to direct me!
There was a terrible difference between me and these children.
If these children did something stupid, they had someone behind them to lend a hand when they fell, or to pick them up when they were down, whereas I had no one; if I fell, I had to go all the way to the bottom, and once there pick myself up, if I wasn't broken.
And I had enough experience to understand that I could very well break.
Despite my youth, I had been tested enough by misfortune to be more circumspect and cautious than children of my age usually are.
If Aunt Catherine had not taken me with the children to go and say goodbye to him, I could well, I had to go alone to kiss him goodbye.
There are sad things in this world and the sight of them leads to gloomy reflections; I don't know of any uglier or sadder than a prison door.
I stopped for a moment before daring to enter the Clichy prison, as if I were afraid that I would be kept there and that the door, that dreadful door, closed on me, would never open again.
I was ushered into a visiting room where there were no bars or grilles, as I thought, and soon afterwards my father arrived, unchained.
I've been waiting for you, my little Rémi," he said, "and I scolded Catherine for not bringing you with the children.
We were alone in the visiting room, sitting on a bench next to each other, and I threw myself into his arms.
I'll just say one more word to you," said the father: "God bless you, my dear boy!
And the two of us remained silent for a few moments, but time had passed and the moment had come for us to part.
Suddenly the father reached into his waistcoat pocket and pulled out a large silver watch, which was held in a buttonhole by a small leather strap.
"It will not be said that we parted without you taking something to remember me by. Here is my watch, I give it to you. It is not very valuable, for you understand that, if it were, I would have been obliged to sell it. It doesn't work very well either, and from time to time it needs a good helping hand. But in the end, it's all I have at the moment, and that's why I'm giving it to you.
Saying this, he put it in my hand; then, as I tried to resist accepting such a beautiful gift, he added sadly:
"You understand that I don't need to know the time here; time is only too long; I'd die counting it. Goodbye, my little Rémi; give me another kiss; you're a good boy, remember that you always have to be.
And I think he took me by the hand to lead me to the exit door; but what happened in that last moment, what was said between us, I have no memory of, I was too troubled, too moved.
When I think of that separation, what I remember is the feeling of stupidity and annihilation that overcame me when I was in the street.
I think I stood for a long, long time in the street in front of the prison gate, unable to decide whether to turn right or left, and I might have stayed there until nightfall, if my hand had suddenly, by chance, come across a round, hard object in my pocket.
Machinically and without really knowing what I was doing, I palmed it: my watch!
Capi looked at me and, as I was too confused to understand him, after waiting a few seconds he stood up against me and put his paw against my pocket, where my watch was.
He wanted to know the time "to tell it to the honourable company", as in the days when he worked with Vitalis.
I showed it to him; he looked at it for quite a long time, as if trying to remember, then, wagging his tail, he barked twelve times; he hadn't forgotten. Oh, how we were going to make money with our watch! It was one more trick I hadn't counted on.
As all this was happening in the street opposite the prison gate, people were watching us curiously and even stopping.
If I had dared, I would have given a performance straight away, but fear of the town sergeants prevented me.
Besides, it was midday, time to get going.
"Forward!
I gave one last look, one last farewell to the prison, behind whose walls poor father would remain locked up, while I would go freely wherever I wished, and we set off.
The object that was most useful to me for my job was a map of France; I knew that they sold them on the quays, and I had decided that I would buy one: so I headed for the quays.
It took me a long time to find a map, at least the kind I wanted, i.e. pasted on canvas, foldable and costing no more than twenty sous, which for me was a lot of money; finally I found one so yellowed that the merchant only charged me seventy-five centimes for it.
Now I could get out of Paris, which I decided to do as quickly as possible.
I had two routes to take: to Fontainebleau via the Barrière d'Italie, or to Orléans via Montrouge. All in all, I was just as indifferent to one as the other, and by chance I chose the Fontainebleau route.
As I followed the rue Mouffetard, whose name I had just read on a blue plaque brought back a whole world of memories: Garofoli, Mattia, Riccardo, the pot with the padlocked lid, the whip with the leather straps and finally Vitalis, my poor, good master, who had died for not renting me out to the padrone in the rue de Lourcine, it seemed to me, as I reached the church of Saint-Médard, that I recognised little Mattia in a child leaning against the wall of the church: It was the same big head, the same wet eyes, the same talking lips, the same gentle, resigned air, the same comical look; but, strangely enough, if it was him, he hadn't grown. 
He recognised me too, for his pale face lit up with a smile.
It was you," he said, "who came to Garofoli's with the old man with the white beard before I went into hospital? Oh, what a headache I had that day!
- And Garofoli is still your master?"
He looked round before answering; then, lowering his voice:
"Garofoli is in prison; he was arrested because he had Orlando killed for beating him too badly.
It pleased me to know that Garofoli was in prison, and for the first time I had the thought that prisons, which inspired such horror in me, could be useful.
"And the children?
- I don't know, I wasn't there when Garofoli was arrested. When I got out of hospital, Garofoli, seeing that I was no good for beating without it making me sick, wanted to get rid of me, and he hired me out for two years, paid in advance, to the Gassot circus. Do you know the Gassot circus? No. Well, it's not a big, big circus, but it's still a circus. They needed a child for the dislocation, and Garofoli hired me out to Father Gassot. I stayed with him until last Monday, and then I was sacked because my head is too big now to fit in the box, and I'm also too sensitive. So I came from Gisors, where the circus is, to join Garofoli, but I couldn't find anyone, the house was closed, and a neighbour told me what I've just told you: Garofoli is in prison. So I came here, not knowing where to go or what to do.
- Why didn't you go back to Gisors?
- Because the day I left Gisors to come to Paris on foot, the circus was leaving for Rouen; and how do you expect me to get to Rouen? It's too far, and I have no money; I haven't eaten since yesterday lunchtime.
I wasn't rich, but I was rich enough not to let this poor child starve to death; how I would have blessed anyone who would have handed me a piece of bread when I was wandering around Toulouse, starving as Mattia was at the moment!
"Stay here," I said.
And I ran to a baker whose shop was on the corner of the street; soon I came back with a loaf of bread which I offered him; he threw himself on it and devoured it.
And now," I said to him, "what do you want to do?
- I don't know what I'm going to do.
- You have to do something.
- I was going to try to sell my violin when you spoke to me, and I would have sold it already, if it didn't make me sad to part with it. My violin is my joy and my consolation; when I'm too sad, I look for a place where I can be alone, and I play for myself; then I see all sorts of beautiful things in the sky; it's much more beautiful than in dreams, it follows one another.
- So why don't you play the violin in the streets?
- I did, but nobody gave me any."
I knew what it was like to play without anyone putting their hand in their pocket.
And you?" asked Mattia, "what do you do now?
I don't know what childish boast inspired me:
"But I'm a troop leader," I said.
In reality this was true, since I had a troop made up of Capi, but the truth bordered on falsity.
Oh, if you wanted to," said Mattia.
- What if I wanted?
- To join your troupe.
Then sincerity returned to me.
But here is my whole troop," I said, pointing to Capi.
- Well, it doesn't matter, there'll be two of us. Oh, please don't leave me; what do you want me to do? I'll just starve to death.
To starve to death! Not everyone who hears this cry understands it in the same way or perceives it in the same place. For me, it resonated in my heart; I knew what it was to die of hunger.
Come with me," I said, "but not as a servant, as a comrade.
And pulling the strap of my harp up over my shoulder:
"Forward!" I said.
After a quarter of an hour, we were on our way out of Paris.
The March sun had dried the road, and the hardened earth was easy to walk on. The air was mild, the April sun shining brightly in a cloudless blue sky.
Next to me, Mattia walked on without saying a word, no doubt thinking, and I said nothing either, so as not to disturb him and also because I had something to think about myself.
Where were we going with this deliberate step?
To tell you the truth, I didn't really know, and in fact I didn't know at all.
Ahead of us.
But afterwards?
I had promised Lise that I would see her brothers and Étiennette first, but I hadn't made any commitment about who I was going to see first: Benjamin, Alexis or Étiennette? I could start with one or the other, as I wished, i.e. the Cévennes, the Charente or Picardy.
The fact that I had left by the south of Paris necessarily meant that it would not be Benjamin who would have my first visit; but I still had the choice between Alexis and Étiennette.
There was one reason why I decided to head south rather than north: I wanted to see Mother Barberin.
If I haven't spoken about her for a long time, we mustn't conclude that I had forgotten her, like an ingrate.
Nor should we conclude that I was ungrateful because I hadn't written to her since I was separated from her.
How many times had I thought of writing to her to say: "I'm thinking of you and I still love you with all my heart"; but on the one hand she couldn't read, and on the other hand the fear of Barberin, a horrible fear, had held me back. If Barberin found me through my letter, if he took me back? if he sold me again to another Vitalis, who wouldn't be Vitalis? No doubt he had the right to do all that. And at that thought I would rather expose myself to being accused of ingratitude by Mother Barberin than run the risk of falling back under Barberin's authority, either because he used that authority to sell me or because he wanted me to work under his orders. I would rather have died - starved to death - than face such a danger.
But if I hadn't dared to write to Mother Barberin, it seemed to me that since I was free to go wherever I wanted, I could try to see her. In fact, since I had taken Mattia 'into my troupe', I thought it might be quite easy. If she was alone, he would tell her the truth, come and warn me, and I would go back to the house where I had spent my childhood and throw myself into the arms of my foster mother; if, on the other hand, Barberin was in the country, Mattia would ask Mother Barberin to go to a designated place, and there I would embrace her.
This was the plan I drew up as I walked along, and it kept me quiet, for it was not too much to take all my attention, all my diligence, to consider a matter of such importance.
Not only did I have to see if I could go and embrace Mother Barberin, but I also had to find out if, on our way, we would find any towns or villages in which we would have a chance of making a profit.
The best way to do this was to consult my map.
As it happened, we were in the middle of the countryside at the time, and we could very easily stop off on a pile of stones without fear of being disturbed.
If you like," I said to Mattia, "we can rest for a while.
- Do you want to talk?
- Do you have something to tell me?
- I'd like to ask you to tell me you.
- I don't mind, we'll say you.
- You can, but I can't.
- I'm ordering you and if you don't obey me, I'll hit you.
- Well, hit, but not on the head.
And he laughed a good, frank, gentle laugh, showing all his teeth, whose whiteness shone out in the middle of his tanned face.
We sat down and I took my map from my bag and spread it out on the grass. It took me quite a while to get my bearings, but remembering the way Vitalis had done it, I eventually mapped out my route: Corbeil, Fontainebleau, Montargis, Gien, Bourges, Saint-Amand, Montluçon. So it was possible to get to Chavanon, and if we were a bit lucky, it was possible not to starve on the way.
As I had unzipped my bag, I had the idea of inspecting what was in it, being quite happy to show Mattia my riches, and I spread everything out on the grass.
I had three linen shirts, three pairs of stockings, five handkerchiefs, all in very good condition, and a pair of slightly worn shoes.
Mattia was dazzled.
What have you got?" I asked him.
- I've got my violin and what I'm wearing.
Since I had taken back my sheepskin and my harp, there was one thing that bothered me a lot - my trousers. It seemed to me that an artist shouldn't wear long trousers; to appear in public, you had to wear short breeches with stockings that had coloured ribbons criss-crossing them. Trousers were fine for a gardener, but now I was an artist!
While I'm arranging my trousers," I said to Mattia, "you should show me how to play the violin.
- Oh, I'd love to.
And taking up his violin he began to play.
Meanwhile, I bravely stuck the tip of my scissors into my trousers just below the knee and began to cut the sheet.
At first I listened to Mattia as I cut my trousers, but soon I stopped using my scissors and was all ears; Mattia played almost as well as Vitalis.
And who taught you the violin?" I said, applauding him.
- No one, just a bit of everyone, and I was the only one working.
- And who taught you music?
- I don't know; I play what I've heard played.
You can't be an artist without a bit of self-respect, and I wanted to show Mattia that I was a musician too.
I took out my harp and immediately, to strike a blow, I sang him my famous song:
Fenesta vascia e patrona crudele...
And then, as should happen between artists, Mattia paid me the compliments I had just paid him with his applause; he had a great talent, I had a great talent, we were worthy of each other.
But we couldn't just sit there and congratulate each other; after making music for ourselves, for our pleasure, we had to make music for our supper and our bedtime.
I buckled my bag, and Mattia in turn put it on his shoulders.
Onwards along the powdery road; now we had to stop at the first village along the way and put on a performance: "Débuts de la troupe Rémi".
As we reached a village after Villejuif, preparing to look for a suitable place for our performance, we passed the large gate of a farm, whose courtyard was full of people in fancy dress, all wearing bouquets tied with streams of ribbons and attached, for the men, to the buttonhole of their clothes, for the women, to their blouses; it did not take much skill to guess that it was a wedding.
It occurred to me that these people would perhaps be pleased to have musicians to make them dance, and immediately I entered the courtyard followed by Mattia and Capi; then, my felt in my hand, and with a great salute (the noble salute of Vitalis), I made my proposal to the first person I found in my path.
He was a fat boy whose brick-red face was framed by a large, stiff collar that cut across his ears; he looked good-natured and placid.
He didn't answer me, but, turning all of a sudden towards the wedding party, because his shiny frock coat was obviously in the way, he stuck two of his fingers in his mouth and blew a whistle so loud that Capi was frightened.
The others," he shouted, "what do you think of a little musical tune? Here come some artists.
- Yes, yes, the music! the music!" shouted the voices of men and women.
- Time for the quadrille!
And in a few minutes, groups of dancers formed in the middle of the courtyard, causing the frightened birds to flee.
Did you play the quadrilles?" I asked Mattia in Italian and in a low voice, as I was rather worried.
- Yes, I have.
And he pointed to one on his violin; chance would have it that I knew it. We were saved.
They had taken a cart out from under a shed, put it on its stanchions and made us get in.
Although Mattia and I had never played together, we didn't do too badly in our quadrille. It's true that we were playing for ears that were fortunately neither delicate nor difficult.
Can any of you play the cornet?" asked the big redhead.
- Yes, I do," said Mattia, "but I don't have one.
- I'll go and get you one, because the violin is pretty, but it's dull.
- So you also play the cornet?" I asked Mattia, still speaking Italian.
- And the slide trumpet and the flute, and everything else that can be played.
Mattia was definitely a precious man.
Soon the piston cornet was brought in, and we started playing quadrilles, polkas, waltzes, especially quadrilles.
We played like that into the night, without the dancers letting us breathe. It wasn't very serious for me, but it was much more so for Mattia, who was in charge of the difficult part, and who was tired by his journey and by deprivation. From time to time I saw him turn pale, as if he was going to be ill, but he was still playing, blowing as much as he could into his mouthpiece. Fortunately I wasn't the only one to notice his paleness; the bride did too.
Enough," she said, "the boy can't take it any more; now it's time to put your hand in the purse for the musicians.
- If you wanted," I said, jumping out of the carriage, "I'd have our cashier collect the money.
And I threw my hat to Capi, who took it in his mouth.
We applauded the grace with which he knew how to salute when someone had given it to him; but, which was better for us, we gave him a lot. As I followed him, I saw the white coins fall into the hat; the groom put the last one in, and it was a five-franc coin.
What a fortune! And that was not all. We were invited to eat in the kitchen and given a barn to sleep in. The next day, when we left the hospitable house, we had a capital of twenty-eight francs.
We owe it all to you, my little Mattia," I said to my comrade, "I couldn't have formed an orchestra on my own.
With twenty-eight francs in our pocket, we were great lords, and when we arrived in Corbeil, I was able, without too much imprudence, to make a few purchases that I considered indispensable: first of all a piston horn which cost me three francs from a scrap metal dealer; for that sum it was neither new nor beautiful, but in the end, scoured and cared for, it would do for us; then some red ribbons for our stockings, and finally an old soldier's bag for Mattia, as it was less tiring to always have a light bag on our shoulders than to carry a heavy one from time to time; we would share equally what we carried with us, and we would be more alert. 
When we left Corbeil, we were in really good shape; we had, all our purchases paid for, thirty francs in our purse, because our performances had been successful; our repertoire was arranged in such a way that we could stay several days in the same country without repeating ourselves too much; finally, Mattia and I got on so well that we were already together like two brothers.
After leaving Corbeil, we headed for Montargis, on our way to visit Mother Barberin.
Going to Mother Barberin's house to kiss her goodbye meant I'd paid my debt of gratitude to her, but it was a small and cheap way of doing it.
What if I took her something?
Now that I was rich, I owed her a present.
What present should I give her?
I didn't look long. There was one above all that would make her happy, not only in the present, but for all her old age - a cow to replace poor Roussette.
How happy Mother Barberin would be if I could give her a cow, and how happy I would be too!
Before arriving at Chavanon I bought a cow, and Mattia, leading it by the tether, brought it into Mother Barberin's yard. Of course, Barberin wasn't there. Mrs Barberin," said Mattia, "here's a cow I've brought you. -- A cow! You're wrong, my boy (and she sighed). -- No, madame, you are indeed Mme Barberin, from Chavanon? Well, it was Mme Barberin's house that the prince (as in fairy tales) told me to take this cow he's offering you. -- What prince?" Then I would appear, throw myself into Mother Barberin's arms, and, after a good kiss, we would make pancakes and doughnuts, which were eaten by the three of us and not by Barberin, as on that Shrove Tuesday when he had come back to knock over our frying pan and put our butter in his onion soup.
What a beautiful dream! Only, to make it come true, we had to be able to buy a cow. How much did a cow cost? I had no idea; expensive, no doubt, very expensive; but still?
What I wanted was not too big, too fat a cow. Firstly, because the bigger the cow, the higher the price; secondly, because the bigger the cow, the more food it needs, and I didn't want my gift to cause any embarrassment for Mother Barberin.
So the most important thing for the moment was to find out the price of the cows, or rather of a cow such as I wanted.
Fortunately, this was not difficult for me, and in our life on the highways, in our evenings at the inn, we found ourselves in contact with drovers and cattle merchants: it was therefore very simple to ask them the price of cows. But the first time I asked a herdsman, whose brave demeanour had attracted me at first, they laughed in my face in reply. The herdsman then fell back in his chair, banging his fist on the table from time to time; then he called the innkeeper.
"Do you know what this little musician is asking me? How much is a cow, not too big, not too fat, but a good cow. Does it have to be clever?"
When he had exhausted all his jokes and put his wit to good use, he was willing to give me a serious answer and even enter into a discussion with me.
He had just my case, a sweet cow, giving a lot of milk, a milk which was a cream, and hardly eating; if I wanted to lay fifteen pistols on her on the table, in other words fifty écus, the cow was mine.
Fifteen pistols or fifty écus, that was a hundred and fifty francs, and I was far from having such a large sum.
Was it impossible to win it? It seemed to me that it wasn't, and that if the luck of our early days were with us, I could raise the hundred and fifty francs penny by penny. But it would take time. Then a new idea germinated in my brain: if, instead of going straight to Chavanon, we went first to Varses, that would give us the time we would lack by following the direct route.
So we would have to go to Varses first and not see Mother Barberin until we got back; then I would certainly have my hundred and fifty francs and we could perform my fairy tale: La Vache du prince (The Prince's Cow).
That morning I told Mattia my idea, and he showed no opposition.
Let's go to Varses," he said; "mines may be interesting, and I'd be very happy to see one.
II -- A black town
It's a long way from Montargis to Varses, which is in the middle of the Cévennes, on the side of the mountain sloping towards the Mediterranean: five or six hundred kilometres in a straight line; more than a thousand for us because of the detours imposed on us by our way of life. We had to look for towns and big cities to give successful performances.
It took us almost three months to cover those thousand kilometres, but when we arrived near Varses, I was delighted to count my money and see that we had used our time well: in my leather purse I had one hundred and twenty-eight francs saved up; I was only twenty-two francs short of buying Mother Barberin's cow.
Mattia was almost as happy as I was, and he was not the least bit proud of having contributed his share to earning such a sum. It's true that his share was considerable and that without him, especially without his piston cornet, Capi and I would never have collected one hundred and twenty-eight francs.
From Varses to Chavanon we would certainly have earned the twenty-two francs we lacked.
What makes and will make the fortune of Varses is what lies beneath the ground, not what lies above it. On the surface, in fact, the appearance is sad and desolate: causses, garrigues, in other words barrenness; no trees, apart from the occasional chestnut tree, mulberry tree and a few puny olive trees; no topsoil, but grey or white stone everywhere; only where the earth has a little depth and allows moisture to penetrate does active vegetation spring up, in pleasant contrast to the desolation of the mountains.
This bareness results in terrible floods, because when it rains, the water runs down the bare slopes as it would on a paved street, and the streams, which are usually dry, then become torrents that instantly swell the rivers in the valleys and cause them to overflow; in a few minutes the water level in the river beds rises by three, four, five metres or even more.
Varses straddles one of these rivers, the Divonne, which in turn receives two small streams within the town: the Truyère ravine and the Saint-Andéol ravine. It's not a pretty town, and it's neither clean nor orderly. The wagons loaded with iron ore or coal that run from morning to night on rails in the middle of the streets continually sow a red and black dust that, on rainy days, forms a liquid mud as deep as the mire of a marsh; on sunny and windy days, on the contrary, they are blinding whirlwinds that roll down the street and rise above the town. From top to bottom, the houses are black, black with mud and dust, which from the street rises to their roofs; black with the smoke from the ovens and furnaces, which from their roofs descends to the street; everything is black, the ground, the sky and even the waters rolled by the Divonne. And yet the people who walk through the streets are even blacker than what surrounds them: the horses are black, the carriages are black, the leaves on the trees are black; it's as if a cloud of soot had descended on the town for a day or as if a flood of bitumen had covered it right up to the roofs. The streets were not made for cars or passers-by, but for railways and mine wagons: rails and turntables are everywhere on the ground; flying bridges, belts and transmission shafts spinning with deafening whirrs are overhead. The vast buildings you pass by tremble to their very foundations and, if you look through the doors or windows, you see masses of molten iron travelling like immense bolides, jackhammers throwing showers of sparks around them, and everywhere, always, the pistons of steam engines rising and falling regularly. There are no monuments, no gardens, no statues in the squares; everything looks the same and has been built on the same model, the cube: the churches, the law courts, the schools, all cubes with more or fewer windows, depending on need.
When we reached the outskirts of Varses, it was two or three o'clock in the afternoon, and a radiant sun was shining in a clear sky; but as we went on, the day grew darker; between the sky and the earth a thick cloud of smoke had been interposed, dragging itself heavily as it tore at the high chimneys. For more than an hour we had been hearing loud whirring noises, a roar like that of the sea, and thumping noises -- the whirring noises were produced by the fans, the thumping noises by the hammers and pestles.
I knew that Alexis's uncle was a miner in Varses, that he worked at the Truyère mine, but that was all. Did he live in Varses itself or nearby? I didn't know.
On entering Varses, I asked where the Truyère mine was, and I was sent to the left bank of the Divonne, to a small valley crossed by the ravine that gave its name to the mine.
They gave us Uncle Gaspard's address; he lived a short distance from the mine, in a steep, winding street that ran down from the hill to the river.
When I asked for him, a woman, who was leaning against the door, chatting with one of her neighbours, leaning against another door, told me that he wouldn't be back until six o'clock, after work.
What do you want with him?" she said.
- I want to see Alexis.
Then she looked at me from head to toe, and then at Capi.
Are you Rémi?" she said. Alexis told us about you; he was expecting you. Which one is this?"
She pointed at Mattia.
"He's my friend.
She was Alexis' aunt. I thought she was going to ask us to come in and rest, for our powdery legs and sunburnt faces were crying out how tired we were; but she did nothing of the sort and simply told me that if I wanted to come back at six o'clock I would find Alexis, who was at the mine.
I didn't have the heart to ask for something that wasn't offered to me; I thanked her for her reply, and we went through the town in search of a baker, as we were very hungry, having not eaten since early morning, and still had only a crust left over from our dinner the previous day. I was ashamed of this reception too, because I could sense that Mattia was wondering what it meant. What was the point of travelling so far?
It seemed to me that Mattia was going to have the wrong idea about my friends, and when I told him about Lise, he would no longer listen to me with the same sympathy. And I really wanted him to feel sympathy and friendship for Lise in advance.
The way in which we had been received did not encourage me to return to the house, so a little before six we went to wait for Alexis at the mine exit.
The Truyère mines are worked by three shafts known as the Saint-Julien shaft, the Sainte-Alphonsine shaft and the Saint-Pancrace shaft, because it is customary in the coal industry to give a saint's name to the extraction, aeration or exhaure (i.e. depletion) shafts; this saint, chosen from the calendar on the day when sinking begins, is used not only to baptise the shafts but also to remind people of the dates.
Warned that it was through this gallery that the workmen were due to leave, I took up a position with Mattia and Capi in front of its opening, and a few minutes after six o'clock had struck, I began to see small points of light flickering in the dark depths of the gallery, which grew rapidly. They were the miners, lamp in hand, coming up into the daylight, their work finished.
They walked slowly, with a heavy gait, as if they were suffering in the knees, which I explained to myself later, when I myself had climbed the stairs and ladders leading to the last level; their faces were black like chimney sweeps, their clothes and hats were covered with coal dust and patches of wet mud. As they passed the lamp room, each one went inside and hung his lamp on a nail.
Although I was attentive, I didn't see Alexis come out, and if he hadn't jumped on my neck, I would have let him pass without recognising him, so little did he look now, black from head to foot, like the comrade who used to run along the paths in our garden, his clean shirt rolled up to his elbows and his collar half-open, revealing his white skin.
"It's Rémi," he said, turning to a man of about forty who was walking beside him and who had a good, frank face like Father Acquin's, which was not surprising, since they were brothers.
I realised it was Uncle Gaspard.
We've been waiting for you for a long time already," he said cheerfully.
- It's a long way from Paris to Varses.
- And your legs are short," he laughed.
Capi, happy to see Alexis again, showed his delight by tugging at the sleeve of his jacket.
In the meantime, I explained to Uncle Gaspard that Mattia was my friend and partner, a good lad I had known in the past, whom I had found again and who played the cornet à piston like no one else.
And here's Mr Capi," said Uncle Gaspard; "it's tomorrow, Sunday; when you're rested, you'll give us a performance. Alexis says he's a dog who knows more than a schoolmaster or an actor.
As much as I had felt embarrassed in front of Aunt Gaspard, I was at my ease with my uncle; he was definitely the father's brother.
"Talk together, boys, you must have a lot to say to each other; as for me, I'm going to have a chat with that young man who plays the piston cornet so well.
For a whole week; even that would have been too short. Alexis wanted to know how my journey had gone, and I, for my part, was in a hurry to find out how he was getting used to his new life, so we were both busy asking questions and didn't think about answering them.
We walked slowly, and the workmen returning to their houses passed us in a long line that stretched the whole street, all black with the same dust that covered the ground in a thick layer.
When we were nearly there, Uncle Gaspard came up to us:
Boys," he said, "you're going to have supper with us.
I was never more pleased to be invited, for as we walked along I wondered whether we shouldn't separate when we got to the door, as my aunt's welcome hadn't given me much hope.
There's Rémi," he said as we entered the house, "and his friend.
- I saw them earlier.
- Well, so much the better! We've got to know each other; they're going to have supper with us.
I was certainly happy to dine with Alexis, that is to say to spend the evening with him, but, to be sincere, I must say that I was also happy to dine. Since we left Paris, we had eaten in an adventurous way, a crust here, a loaf there, but rarely a real meal, sitting on a chair with soup on a plate. With what we earned, we were, it's true, rich enough to afford feasts in good inns, but we had to save for the prince's cow, and Mattia was such a good boy that he was almost as happy as I was at the thought of buying our cow.
Our supper did not last long.
Boy," said Uncle Gaspard, "you will sleep with Alexis.
Then, turning to Mattia, he said:
"And you, if you want to come into the bakehouse, we'll see about making you a good bed of straw and hay.
The evening and a good part of the night were not spent by Alexis and myself sleeping.
Uncle Gaspard was a picker, which meant that he used a pick to cut the coal in the mine; Alexis was his roller, which meant that he pushed and rolled a wagon called a skip on rails inside the mine, from the extraction point to a shaft, into which the cut coal was piled; when it reached the shaft, the skip was attached to a cable which, pulled by the machine, raised it to the top.
Although he had only been a miner for a short time, Alexis already had a love and vanity for his mine: it was the most beautiful and curious in the country, and he put into his account the importance of a traveller who arrives from an unknown land and finds attentive ears to listen to him.
First you followed a gallery cut into the rock and, after walking for ten minutes, you found a straight, quick staircase; then, at the bottom of this staircase, a wooden ladder, then another staircase, then another ladder, and then you reached the first level, at a depth of fifty metres. To reach the second level, at ninety metres, and the third, at two hundred metres, the same system of ladders and stairs was used. It was on this third level that Alexis was working, and to reach the depth of his site, he had to walk three times as far as those who climb the towers of Notre-Dame de Paris.
But if the ascent and descent are easy in the towers of Notre-Dame, where the staircase is regular and well-lit, this was not the case in the mine, where the steps, carved out of the rock, are sometimes high, sometimes low, sometimes wide, sometimes narrow. There was no light other than the lamp you carried in your hand, and on the ground there was slippery mud that was constantly wet with water that trickled down drop by drop and sometimes fell cold on your face.
Two hundred metres was a long way down, but that wasn't all: the galleries had to be used to reach the various levels and get to the work site, and the total length of the Truyère galleries was 35 to 40 kilometres. Of course, you didn't have to cover all 40 kilometres, but sometimes the journey was tiring, as you had to walk through the water that filtered through the cracks in the rock, forming a stream in the middle of the path and flowing down to the sumps, where the drainage machines took it and poured it out.
When these galleries ran through solid rock, they were simply underground tunnels; but when they ran through scree or shifting ground, they were timbered at the top and on both sides with axe-worked fir trunks, because saw cuts lead to rapid rotting. Although these tree trunks were arranged in such a way as to resist the pressure of the ground, this pressure was often so strong that the wood bent and the galleries narrowed or collapsed to the point where you could only crawl through them. On these woods grew mushrooms and light, cottony flakes, whose snowy whiteness contrasted with the blackness of the ground; the fermentation of the trees gave off the smell of petrol; and on the mushrooms, on the unfamiliar plants, on the white moss, we saw flies, spiders and butterflies, which bear no resemblance to the individuals of the same species that we encounter in the air. There were also rats running around and bats clinging to the woodwork by their feet, upside down.
These galleries intersected, and here and there, as in Paris, there were squares and crossroads; some were beautiful and wide like the boulevards, others narrow and low like the streets of the Saint-Marcel district; only all this underground city was much less well lit than the cities during the night, because there were no lanterns or gas spouts, but simply the lamps that the miners carry with them. If the light was often lacking, the noise always told you that you weren't in the land of the dead; in the felling yards, you could hear the detonations of gunpowder whose draught brought you the smell and the smoke; in the galleries, you could hear the rolling of the wagons; in the shafts, the rubbing of the extraction cages against the guides, and above all the roar of the steam engine installed on the second level.
But where the spectacle was most curious was in the ascents, i.e. in the galleries cut into the slope of the seam; it was there that you had to see the pickers working half-naked to break down the coal, lying on their sides or crouching on their knees. From these lifts, the coal descended into the levels, from where it was rolled to the extraction shafts.
This was what the mine looked like on working days, but there were also accident days. Two weeks after his arrival in Varses, Alexis had witnessed one of these accidents and had almost fallen victim to it: a firedamp explosion. Firedamp is a gas that forms naturally in coalfields and explodes as soon as it comes into contact with a flame. Nothing is more terrible than this explosion, which burns and overturns everything in its path; it can only be compared to the explosion of a powder magazine full of gunpowder. As soon as the flame of a lamp or match comes into contact with the gas, ignition breaks out instantly in all the galleries; it destroys everything in the mine, even the extraction or ventilation shafts, from which it removes the roofs. The temperature is sometimes raised so high that the coal in the mine is transformed into coke.
Everything Alexis told me aroused my curiosity, which was already high when we arrived in Varses, to go down into the mine; but when I spoke to Uncle Gaspard about it the next day, he replied that it was impossible, because only those who worked in the mine were allowed to enter.
If you want to become a miner," he added, laughing, "that's easy, and then you'll be able to satisfy yourself. Besides, the job is no worse than any other, and if you're afraid of rain and thunder, it's the one for you; in any case it's better than being a singer on the highways. You'll stay with Alexis. Is that it, boy? We'll also find a job for Mattia, but not playing the cornet, for example!
It wasn't to stay in Varses that I had come, and I had set myself another task, another goal than pushing a skip all day long into the second or third level of the Truyère.
So I had to give up on satisfying my curiosity, and I thought I would leave without knowing any more than I had learnt from Alexis's stories or the answers I had managed to extract from Uncle Gaspard, when, as a result of chance circumstances, I was able to learn in all their horrors, to feel in all their fears, the dangers to which miners are sometimes exposed.
III -- Rover
The day before I was due to leave, Alexis came home with his right hand badly bruised by a large block of coal under which he had clumsily let it get caught; one finger was half crushed; the whole hand was bruised.
The company doctor came to see him and bandaged him up. His condition was not serious, the hand would heal and so would the finger, but he needed rest.
Uncle Gaspard's character was to take life as it came, without sorrow or anger; there was only one thing that could make him lose his usual bonhomie: an obstacle to his work.
When he heard that Alexis had been sentenced to rest for several days, he cried out. He had no one to replace Alexis; if he had to replace him completely, he would find someone, but for a few days only, that was impossible at the moment; there was a shortage of men, or at least children.
Seeing this and understanding the reasons for his desolation, and feeling that it was almost a duty in such circumstances to pay in my own way for the hospitality that had been given to us, I asked him if the job of wheelman was difficult.
"Nothing could be easier; all you have to do is push a wagon on rails.
- Is the wagon heavy?
- Not too heavy, because Alexis pushed it well.
- That's true! So if Alexis pushed it well, I could push it too.
- You, boy?"
And he laughed out loud; but soon, regaining his seriousness:
"Of course you could, if you wanted to.
- I want to, since it might be useful to you.
- Tomorrow you'll go down the mine with me. It's true that you'll be doing me a favour; but perhaps it will be useful to you yourself; if you took a liking to the trade, it would be better than running the highways; there are no wolves to fear in the mine."
What would Mattia do while I was in the mine? I couldn't leave him in Uncle Gaspard's care.
I asked him if he didn't want to go off on his own with Capi to give some performances in the area, and he agreed straight away.
"I'll be very happy to earn you some money for the cow on my own," he laughed.
So it was agreed that, while I went down to the mine the next day, Mattia would go and give musical and dramatic performances, so as to increase our fortune, and Capi, to whom I explained this arrangement, seemed to understand it.
The next morning I was given Alexis's work clothes.
After advising Mattia and Capi one last time to behave themselves on their expedition, I followed Uncle Gaspard.
Be careful," he said, handing me my lamp, "follow in my footsteps, and when you go down the ladders, never let go of one rung without first holding on to another.
We entered the gallery, he walking first, me at his heels.
If you slip on the stairs," he continued, "don't let go, hold on, the bottom is far and hard.
I didn't need these recommendations to be moved, because it's not without a certain turmoil that one leaves the light to enter the night, the surface of the earth for its depths. I instinctively turned back; but we had already penetrated quite far into the gallery, and daylight, at the end of this long black tube, was no more than a globe as white as the moon in a dark, starless sky. I was ashamed of this mechanical movement, which lasted no more than a flash, and I quickly set off again.
"The stairs", he soon said.
We were standing in front of a black hole, and in its depths, unfathomable to my eyes, I could see lights swaying, large at the entrance, smaller until they were no more than dots as they moved away. They were the lamps of the workers who had entered the mine before us. The sound of their conversation, like a muffled murmur, reached us carried by a tepid air that stained our faces; this air had a smell that I was breathing for the first time; it was something like a mixture of ether and petrol.
After the staircase came the ladders, after the ladders another staircase.
"Here we are on the first level," he said.
We were in a semicircular gallery with straight walls; the walls were made of masonry. The vault was a little higher than a man could stand, but there were places where you had to bend to get through, either because the upper vault had lowered or because the ground had risen.
It's the way the ground pushes up," he said. As the mountain has been hollowed out everywhere and there are voids, the earth wants to come down and, when it weighs too much, it crushes the galleries.
On the ground were railway tracks and along the gallery ran a small stream.
"This stream joins up with others that, like it, receive water from seepage; they all fall into a sump. That's one thousand or twelve hundred cubic metres of water that the machine has to throw into the Divonne every day. If it stopped, the mine would soon be flooded. Besides, at the moment, we're right under the Divonne".
And as I made an involuntary movement, he laughed out loud.
"At a depth of fifty metres, there's no danger of it falling down your neck.
- What if there's a hole?
- Oh yes, a hole. There are mines where flooding is to be feared, but that's not here; it's enough with the firedamp and the landslides, the blasts from the mine.
When we arrived at our work site, Uncle Gaspard showed me what I had to do, and when our skip was full of coal, he pushed it with me to teach me how to drive it to the shaft and park on the sidings when I met other drivers coming my way.
He was right to say that it wasn't a very difficult job, and in a few hours, if I didn't become skilled at it, I at least became sufficient. I lacked the skill and habit, without which one never succeeds in any trade, and I was obliged to replace them, as best I could, with more effort, which resulted in less useful work and more fatigue.
Fortunately I was hardened against fatigue by the life I had led for several years and especially by my three-month journey; so I didn't complain, and Uncle Gaspard declared that I was a good boy who would one day make a good miner.
But although I'd really wanted to go down into the mine, I had no desire to stay there; I'd been curious, but I had no vocation.
Next to Uncle Gaspard's site, my neighbour was a roller who, instead of being a child like me and the other rollers, was on the contrary a man with a white beard; when I say white beard, I mean that it was white on Sunday, the day of the big wash, because during the week it started out grey on Monday and turned completely black on Saturday. Finally, he was over sixty. When he was young, he had been a "boiseur", i.e. a carpenter in charge of laying and maintaining the timbers that make up the galleries; but a landslide had crushed three of his fingers, forcing him to give up his trade. The company he worked for gave him a small pension, as he had saved three of his comrades in the accident. For a few years he lived on this pension. Then, when the company went bankrupt, he found himself without resources, without a job, and he joined the Truyère as a wheelman. They called him the magister, in other words the schoolmaster, because he knew a lot of things that the pickers and even the master miners didn't know, and because he was happy to talk about them, proud of his knowledge.
During mealtimes, we got to know each other, and very quickly he took a liking to me; I was an enraged questioner, he was a conversationalist, and we became inseparable. In the mine, where people don't usually talk much, they called us the chatterboxes.
Alexis's stories hadn't taught me everything I wanted to know, and I wasn't satisfied with Uncle Gaspard's answers either, because when I asked him, "What is coal? he always replied, "It's coal found in the ground".
This answer from Uncle Gaspard about coal and others like it that he had given me were not enough for me, as Vitalis had taught me to be less easily satisfied. When I asked the magister the same question, he gave me a very different answer.
"Instead of putting in our chimneys the trees of our time, which men like you and me have turned into coal, we put in trees grown in very ancient forests and which have been turned into coal by the forces of nature, by fires, volcanoes and natural earthquakes".
And as I looked at him in amazement:
We don't have time to talk about that today," he said, "we've got to push the skip, but tomorrow's Sunday, come and see me; I'll explain it to you at home; I've got bits of coal and rock here that I've been collecting for thirty years and that will make you understand with your eyes what you'll hear with your ears. They laughingly call me the magister; but the magister, you'll see, is good for something; a man's life is not all in his hands, it's also in his head. Like you, and at your age, I was curious; I lived in the mine, I wanted to know what I saw every day; I made the engineers talk to me when they were willing to answer, and I read. After my accident, I had some time to myself, and I used it to learn. When you have eyes to look at and you put on the glasses that books give you, you end up seeing a lot of things. Now I don't have much time to read and I don't have any money to buy books, but I still have eyes and I keep them open. Come tomorrow; I'd be happy to teach you to look around. You don't know what a word that falls into a fertile ear can do. It was because I took a great scientist called Brongniart to the mines of Bessèges and heard him speak during his research that I got the idea of learning, and today I know a bit more than our comrades. See you tomorrow.
The next day I told Uncle Gaspard that I was going to see the magister.
He came to meet me as I entered, and in a happy voice said:
I ordered you a biroulade," he said, "because, if youth has ears and eyes, it also has a gullet, so that the best way to be one's friends is to satisfy all at once.
Biroulade is a feast of roasted chestnuts soaked in white wine, which is highly honoured in the Cévennes.
After the biroulade," continued the magister, "we'll have a chat, and while we're chatting I'll show you my collection.
He said the word "my collection" in a tone that justified the reproach levelled at him by his comrades, and surely no curator of a museum was prouder. Moreover, this collection appeared to be very rich, at least as far as I could tell, and it took up the whole flat, arranged on boards and tables for the small samples, and on the floor for the large ones. Over the last twenty years, he had gathered together everything curious he had found in his work and, as the mines in the Cère and Divonne basin are rich in fossil plants, he had rare specimens that would have delighted a geologist and a naturalist.
He was at least as eager to talk as I was to listen, so the biroulade was quickly dispatched.
Since you wanted to know what charcoal was," he said, "listen, I'm going to explain it to you roughly and in a few words, so that you'll be able to look at my collection, which will explain it better than I can, because, although I'm called the magister, I'm not a scientist. The earth we inhabit has not always been what it is now; it has passed through several states that have been modified by what we call the revolutions of the globe. There were times when our country was covered with plants that now only grow in warm countries: ferns, for example, grew into trees. Then came a revolution, and this vegetation was replaced by a completely different one, which in turn was replaced by a new one; and so on for thousands, perhaps millions of years. It was this accumulation of plants and trees, decomposing and superimposing each other, that produced the layers of coal. Don't be incredulous, I'm going to show you a few pieces of coal from my collection, and above all a large number of pieces of stone taken from the benches we call the wall or the roof, all bearing the imprints of these plants, which were preserved there in the same way as plants are preserved between the sheets of paper in a herbarium. Coal is therefore formed, as I said, by an accumulation of plants and trees: it is therefore nothing more than decomposed and compressed wood. How was this accumulation formed? you ask. That's more difficult to explain, and I don't even think that scientists have managed to explain it very well yet, since they don't agree among themselves. Some believe that all these plants carried by the waters formed immense rafts on the seas, which came aground here and there pushed by the currents. Others say that the coal beds are due to the peaceful accumulation of plants which, one after the other, were buried in the very place where they had grown. They have found that a hectare of forest wood cut down and spread out on the ground yields a layer of wood barely eight millimetres thick; transformed into coal, this layer of wood would yield only 2 millimetres. Yet buried in the earth are layers of coal 20 and 30 metres thick. How long did it take for these layers to form? You understand, don't you, that a forest doesn't grow in a day; it takes about a hundred years to develop. To form a layer of coal 30 metres thick, you need a succession of 5,000 trees growing in the same place, in other words 500,000 years, which is quite an astonishing figure, isn't it? But it's not exact, because trees don't grow in such regular succession; they take more than a hundred years to grow and die, and when one species replaces another, it takes a series of transformations and revolutions for this layer of decomposed plants to be in a position to nourish a new one. So you can see that 500,000 years is nothing, and that it probably takes a lot longer. How many more? I don't know, and it's not for a man like me to find out. All I wanted was to give you an idea of what charcoal is, so that you would be in a position to look at my collection. Now let's go and see it.
The visit lasted into the night, for with each piece of stone, each plant imprint, the magister repeated his explanations, so that in the end I began to understand more or less what had surprised me so much at first.
IV -- The flood
The next morning we found ourselves in the mine.
Well," said Uncle Gaspard, "were you pleased with the boy, Magister?
- Yes, he has ears, and I hope he'll soon have eyes.
- In the meantime, let him have arms today", said Uncle Gaspard.
And he handed me a wedge to help him loosen a piece of coal that he had cut from underneath, because the pickers get help from the rollers.
As I had just rolled my skip to the Sainte-Alphonsine shaft for the third time, I heard a tremendous noise from the shaft, a dreadful roar the like of which I had never heard since I started working in the mine. Was it a landslide, a general collapse? I listened; the noise continued, reverberating on all sides. What did it all mean? My first feeling was one of horror, and I thought of running away and getting to the ladders; but I had already been laughed at so many times for my fears, that shame made me stay. It was a mine explosion, a skip falling into the shaft; perhaps it was simply backfill coming down the corridors.
Suddenly a platoon of rats ran between my legs like a squadron of cavalry escaping; then I seemed to hear a strange rustling against the floor and walls of the gallery with a splash of water. As the place where I had stopped was perfectly dry, this noise was inexplicable.
I took my lamp to look and lowered it to the ground.
It was indeed water; it was coming up the gallery from the side of the well. This tremendous noise, this rumbling, were therefore produced by a waterfall rushing into the mine.
Leaving my skip on the tracks, I ran to the site.
I hadn't gone ten paces when I saw the magister, who was also going down into the gallery to see what the noise was.
Water in the mine!" shouted Uncle Gaspard.
- The Divonne has made a hole," I said.
- You fool!
- Save yourself!" shouted the magister.
The water level had risen rapidly in the gallery and was now up to our knees, slowing our progress.
The magister started to run with us, and the three of us shouted as we passed the construction sites:
"Save yourselves! The water is in the mine!
The water level rose with furious rapidity; fortunately we were not very far from the ladders, otherwise we would never have reached them.
The forty metres separating the second level from the first had never been crossed with such speed. But before we reached the last rung, a flood of water fell on our heads and drowned our lamps. It was a waterfall.
We're lost," said the magister in an almost calm voice, "say your prayers, Rémi.
But at the same moment, seven or eight lamps appeared in the gallery, rushing towards us; the water was already up to our knees; without bending down, we touched it with our hands. It wasn't still water, but a torrent, a whirlpool that swept everything along in its path and made pieces of wood twirl like feathers.
The same word that had escaped the magister to the men running towards us also escaped:
"We're lost!
They had reached us.
We have to throw ourselves into a lift," said the magister.
- And then what?
- The lift leads nowhere.
Throwing ourselves into the ascent was indeed taking a dead end, but we weren't in a position to wait and choose: we had to either take the ascent and thus have a few minutes ahead of us, in other words the hope of saving ourselves, or continue down the gallery with the certainty of being swallowed up, submerged before a few seconds.
With the magister at our head, we set off upwards. Two of our comrades wanted to push on into the gallery, but we never saw them again.
Then, regaining consciousness of life, we heard a noise that had been deafening our ears since we started to flee and which we had not yet heard: landslides, whirlpools and waterfalls, splinters of woodwork, explosions of compressed air; it was a dreadful din throughout the mine that devastated us.
The magister had not spoken since we were in the ascent, for his soul was above useless complaints.
Children," he said, "you mustn't tire yourselves out; if we remain clinging on hand and foot like this, we shall soon wear ourselves out; we must dig ourselves some footholds in the shale".
The advice was correct, but difficult to carry out, because no one had brought a pick; we all had our lamps, but none of us had a tool.
"With the hooks of our lamps", continued the magister.
And each of us began to cut into the ground with the hooks of his lamp; it was a difficult task, as the ascent was very steep and slippery. But when you know that if you slip, you'll die at the bottom of the slide, it gives you strength and skill. In less than a few minutes, we had all dug a hole where we could place our foot.
Once we'd done that, we took a breath and recognised each other. There were seven of us: the magister, me next to him, Uncle Gaspard, three pickers called Pagès, Compayrou and Bergounhoux, and a roller called Carrory; the other workers had disappeared into the gallery.
The noises in the mine continued unabated. There are no words to convey the intensity of this horrible din; the detonations of the cannon mingling with thunder and landslides could not have produced a more formidable noise.
Stunned and panic-stricken, we looked at each other, searching our neighbour's eyes for explanations that our minds could not give us.
To overcome the din, we spoke at the top of our voices, but our voices were deaf.
Talk a little," said the magister.
- What do you want me to say?
- Whatever you like, just speak, say the first words that come to you".
I said a few words.
"All right, a little softer now. That's it. That's it.
- Are you losing your mind, eh, magister?
- Are you going mad with fear?
- Do you think you're dead?
- I think that the water won't get us here and that, if we die, at least we won't be drowned.
- What does that mean, magister?
- Look at your lamp.
- Well, it's burning.
- As usual?
- No; the flame is brighter, but shorter.
- Is there any firedamp?
- No," said the magister, "that's nothing to worry about either; there's no more danger from firedamp than from the water, which won't rise a foot now.
- So don't play the sorcerer.
- I'm not playing the sorcerer. We're in an air bell, and it's the compressed air that prevents the water from rising; the rise closed at the end does for us what the diver's bell does. The air displaced by the water has built up in this gallery and now resists the water and pushes it back.
- So we're saved!" said Carrory.
- Saved? I didn't say that. We won't be drowned, that's what I promise you. What saves us is that, the lift being closed, the air can't escape. But it's precisely what saves us that loses us at the same time. The air can't get out, it's trapped; but we're trapped too, we can't get out.
- When the water goes down...
- Will it go down? I don't know; to know that, you'd have to know how it came about, and who can say?
- Since you say it's a flood?
- All we can do is wait," says the magister.
- But we're going to die of hunger.
- Hunger can be resisted; I read that some workers, surprised like us by the waters in a mine, went twenty-four days without eating. That was many years ago, at the time of the Wars of Religion; but if it were yesterday, it would be the same thing. No, it's not hunger that frightens me.
- What's tormenting you, since you say the waters can't rise?
- How long can we live in this air? I don't know. If I were a scientist instead of an ignoramus, I'd tell you, but I don't know. We're about forty metres underground, and we probably have thirty-five or forty metres of water beneath us: that means that the air is under a pressure of four or five atmospheres. How do you live in this compressed air? That's what we need to know and that's what we're going to learn, perhaps to our cost.
The magister was not unaware of our desperate situation, and although he saw it clearly in all its horror, he thought only of the means to be taken to organise our defence.
Now," he said, "it's a question of arranging to stay here without the danger of falling overboard. In my opinion, the best thing to do is to dig out landings for ourselves, like on a staircase; there are seven of us, we can all fit on two landings; four will be on the first, three on the second.
- What should we dig with?
- We don't have any picks.
- With our lamp hooks in the dust, with our knives in the hard parts.
- We'll never be able to.
- Don't say that, Pagès; in our situation you can do anything to save your life; if sleep were to take one of us as we are at the moment, that one would be lost.
The magister's coolness and decisiveness had given him an authority over us that was becoming more powerful by the moment; that's the great and beautiful thing about courage, it imposes itself. We instinctively felt that his moral strength was fighting against the catastrophe that had wiped out our own, and we expected to be helped by this strength.
It was obvious that digging out these two levels was the first thing to be done; we had to establish ourselves, if not comfortably, at least in such a way as not to roll into the abyss at our feet. Four lamps were lit, giving us enough light to guide us.
So we set to work. We all had knives in our pockets, good knives, with solid handles and strong blades.
Three will start the ascent," said the magister, "the three strongest; and the weakest: Rémi, Carrory, Pagès and me, we'll put the spoil away.
The work we had to do would have been very simple if we had had tools, but with knives it was difficult and could only take a long time. We had to establish two landings by digging them into the shale and, in order not to be exposed to falling down the slope on the way up, these landings had to be wide enough to give room for four of us on one and three on the other. It was to achieve this result that the work was undertaken.
Two men dug the ground at each site, and the third lowered the pieces of shale. The magister, with a lamp in his hand, went from one site to the other.
While digging, we found some pieces of woodwork in the dust which had been buried there and which were very useful for holding back our rubble and preventing it from rolling down.
After three hours of work without rest, we had dug a plank on which we could sit.
Enough for now," said the magister, "later we'll widen the plank so that we can lie down; we mustn't wear out our strength unnecessarily, we'll need it.
We settled down, the magister, Uncle Gaspard, Carrory and I, on the lower landing, the three pickers on the higher one.
We must be careful with our lamps," said the magister, "so turn them off and leave only one burning.
The orders were carried out as soon as they were given.
We were about to put out the useless lamps when the magister signalled for us to stop.
"Just a minute," he said, "a draught may put out our lamp; it is hardly likely, yet we must count on the impossible: who has matches to relight it?"
Although it is strictly forbidden to light fires in the mine, almost all the workers have matches in their pockets; so, as there was no engineer there to note the infringement of the regulations, to the question: "Who has matches?" four voices replied: "Me!
I've got some too," continued the magister, "but they're wet.
This was the case with the others, for each of us had matches in our trousers and we had soaked in water up to our chests or shoulders.
Carrory, who had slow comprehension and even slower speech, finally replied:
"I've got matches too.
- Wet?
- I don't know, they're in my bonnet.
- So put on your bonnet.
Instead of passing on his cap, as requested, an otter cap as big as a fairground Turk's turban, Carrory passed us a box of matches; thanks to the position they had occupied during our immersion, they had escaped drowning.
"Now blow out the lamps," ordered the magister.
Only one lamp remained lit, which barely illuminated our cage.
V -- On the way up
There was silence in the mine; no sound reached us any more; at our feet the water was motionless, without a ripple or a murmur. The mine was full, as the magister had said, and the water, having invaded all the galleries from the floor to the roof, walled us into our prison more solidly, more hermetically than a stone wall. This heavy, impenetrable silence, this silence of death, was more frightening, more stupefying than the appalling din we had heard when the waters first broke; we were in the tomb, buried alive, and thirty or forty metres of earth weighed down on our hearts.
Work kept us busy and distracted; rest gave us a sense of our situation, and for everyone, even the magister, there was a moment of annihilation.
I was afraid of the water, afraid of the shadow, afraid of death; the silence annihilated me; the uncertain walls of the ascent crushed me as if with all their weight they had weighed on my body. So I wouldn't see Lise, or Étiennette, or Alexis, or Benjamin again? who would tie them all together after me? Would I never see Arthur again, or Mrs Milligan, or Mattia, or Capi? Could Lise ever be made to understand that I was dead to her? And Mother Barberin, poor Mother Barberin! My thoughts went on, each more gloomy than the last; and when I looked at my comrades to distract myself and saw them just as overwhelmed and devastated as I was, I returned to my reflections, sadder and gloomier still. They, however, were used to life in the mines, so they didn't suffer from the lack of air, sun and freedom; the earth didn't weigh down on them.
Suddenly, in the middle of the silence, Uncle Gaspard's voice rang out:
In my opinion," he said, "we're not working on our rescue yet.
- Why do you think that?
- We can't hear a thing.
- The whole town is destroyed, it was an earthquake.
- Or maybe they think we're all lost and there's nothing they can do for us.
- So we've been abandoned?
- Why do you think that about your comrades?" interrupted the magister, "it's not fair to accuse them. You know very well that when there are accidents, miners don't abandon each other, and that twenty men, a hundred men, would rather be killed than leave a comrade without help. You know that, don't you?
He said this in an energetic tone that would convince even the most incredulous and frightened.
But Bergounhoux replied:
"What if they think we're all dead?
- We're still working, but if you're afraid of that, let's prove to them that we're alive; let's bang on the wall as hard as we can. You know how sound travels through the earth; if they hear us, they'll know to hurry, and our noise will be used to direct the search."
Without waiting any longer, Bergounhoux, who was wearing thick boots, began to bang as if he were calling back the miners, and this noise, and the idea it aroused in us, woke us from our numbness. Would they hear us? Would they answer us?
Let's see, magister," said Uncle Gaspard, "if they hear us, what are they going to do to come to our rescue?
- There are only two ways, and I'm sure that the engineers will use both of them: drill downspouts to meet our ascent, and drain the water.
- Oh, drilling down!
- Ah! drain the water!
These two interruptions did not faze the magister.
"We're forty metres down, aren't we? Drilling six or eight metres a day, that's seven or eight days to get to us.
- You can't drill six metres a day.
- Not in ordinary work, but you can do a lot of things to save your comrades.
- We could never live for eight days; just think, magister, eight days!
Eight days! The magister had told us about workers who had stayed submerged for twenty-four days. But that was a story, and we were dealing with reality. Once this idea had taken hold of my mind, I couldn't hear another word of the conversation. Eight days!
I don't know how long I had been weighed down by this idea when the discussion stopped.
Listen," said Carrory, who, precisely because he was so close to the brute, had the faculties of the animal more developed than the rest of us.
- What is it?
- You hear something in the water.
- You must have rolled a stone.
- No, it's a thud.
We listened.
I had a keen ear for the sounds of life and earth, but I couldn't hear a thing. My comrades, who were used to the sounds of the mine, were happier than I was.
Yes," said the magister, "something is happening in the water.
- What, magister?
- I don't know what it is.
- The water falling.
- No, the noise isn't continuous, it's jolting and regular.
- Jolting and regular, we're saved, children! It's the sound of the draining buckets in the wells.
- The draining buckets...".
All at once, in the same voice, we repeated these two words and, as if we had been hit by an electric shock, we stood up.
We were no longer forty metres underground, the air was no longer compressed, the walls of the ascent were no longer pressing down on us, the ringing in our ears had stopped, we were breathing freely, our hearts were beating in our chests!
Before we saw the warm light of the sun again, before we heard the sound of the wind in the leaves, we had to stay there for long, cruel days, suffering all kinds of pain, wondering anxiously if we would ever see that light again and if we would ever hear that sweet music.
But in order to tell you about this appalling disaster in the Truyère mines, as it happened, I must now tell you how it happened and what means the engineers used to save us.
When we went down into the mine on Monday morning, the sky was covered with dark clouds and everything pointed to a storm. Around seven o'clock the storm broke, accompanied by a veritable deluge. The low-lying clouds had entered the tortuous valley of the Divonne and, trapped in this cirque of hills, had been unable to rise above it; all the rain they contained had been poured down the valley; it wasn't a downpour, it was a cataract, a deluge. In a few minutes, the waters of the Divonne and its tributaries had swollen, which is easy to understand, because on stony ground, water is not absorbed, but, following the slope of the land, it rolls down to the river. Suddenly, the waters of the Divonne rushed down its steep bed, and those of the Saint-Andéol and Truyère torrents overflowed. The waters of the Truyère ravine, which had been forced back by the Divonne flood, were unable to drain away, so they spilled over onto the land above the mines. The overflow was almost instantaneous, but the workers outside washing the ore, forced by the storm to take shelter, were in no danger. This was not the first time that the Truyère had been flooded, and as the openings to the three shafts were at heights where the water could not rise, the only concern was to protect the piles of wood that had been prepared to line the galleries.
The mine engineer was busy with this task when he suddenly saw the waters swirling and rushing into a chasm they had just dug for themselves. This chasm was on the outcrop of a coal seam.
He didn't need to think long to understand what had just happened: the waters had rushed into the mine, and the surface of the bed served as their bed; they were sinking outside; the mine was going to be flooded, it was going to fill up; the workers were going to be drowned.
He ran to the Saint-Julien shaft and gave orders for it to be lowered. But as he was about to step into the skip, he stopped. A terrible noise could be heard inside the mine: a torrent of water.
"Don't go down," say the men around him, trying to hold him back.
But he freed himself from their embrace and, taking his watch from his waistcoat, said:
Here," he said, handing it to one of the men, "you can give my watch to my daughter if I don't come back.
Then, turning to the men manoeuvring the skips, he said:
"Come down," he said.
Then, raising his head towards the man to whom he had given his watch, he said:
"Tell him his father sends his love".
The skip was lowered. The engineer called. Five miners arrived. He makes them get into the skip. While they were being taken away, he shouted again, but to no avail; his cries were covered by the sound of the water and the collapsing.
However, the water reached the gallery, and at that moment the engineer saw some lamps. He ran towards them, knee-deep in water, and brought back three more men. The skip was lowered, he had them put in and wanted to return to meet the lights he had seen. But the men he had saved grabbed him by force and pulled him into the skip with them, giving the signal to go back up. It was time, the water had invaded everything.
This method of rescue was impossible. Another method had to be used. But which one? There was hardly anyone around him. One hundred and fifty workers had gone down, since one hundred and fifty lamps had been distributed in the morning; only thirty lamps had been brought back to the lamp factory, meaning that one hundred and twenty men remained in the mine. Are they dead? are they alive? have they been able to find refuge? These questions were posed with horrible anguish in his frightened mind.
Just as the engineer noticed that one hundred and twenty men were trapped in the mine, explosions occurred outside in various places; earth and stones were thrown from great heights; the houses shook as if shaken by an earthquake. This phenomenon can be explained by the engineer: the gases and air, forced back by the waters, have been compressed in the blind risers, and where the earth load is too low, above the outcrops, they cause the crust of the earth to shatter like the walls of a boiler. The mine is full; the catastrophe is over.
And the rescue work begins.
Will a single survivor be found among these one hundred and twenty men? Doubt is strong, hope is weak. But it doesn't matter. Onwards and upwards!
Dumpers were installed in the three shafts, and they would not stop day or night until the last drop of water had been poured into the Divonne.
At the same time, tunnels began to be dug. We don't really know where we're going; it's a bit haphazard, but we're going. There were differences of opinion among the engineers on the usefulness of these galleries, which had to be directed in an adventurous manner, given the uncertainty as to the position of the workers who were still alive; but the mine engineer hoped that some men would have been able to take refuge in the old workings, where the flooding would not have been able to reach them, and he wanted a direct breakthrough to be made from daylight towards these old workings, even if it meant saving no-one.
The coal he cuts is removed as he goes along, in baskets that are passed back and forth in a chain; as soon as the picker is tired, he is replaced by another. In this way, without rest or respite, day and night, these two tasks continue simultaneously: exhaustion and drilling.
If time is long for those outside who are working for our deliverance, how much longer still is it for us, helpless and prisoners, who have to wait without knowing whether they will reach us soon enough to save us!
The sound of exhausted buckets did not keep us for long in the fever of joy that it had initially given us. The reaction came with reflection. We had not been abandoned, we were being rescued, that was the hope; would the exhaustion come quickly enough? that was the anguish.
The torments of the mind were now joined by torments of the body. The position in which we were obliged to stand on our landing was most tiring; we could no longer make any movements to stretch ourselves, and our headaches had become sharp and annoying.
If we are forbidden to eat, we are allowed to drink," said Compayrou.
- For that, as much as you like, we have plenty of water.
- Use up the gallery".
Pagès wanted to go down, but the magister wouldn't let him.
"Rémi is lighter and more skilful, he'll go down and pass us the water.
- Into what?
- In my boot".
I was given a boot and prepared to slide down into the water.
Wait a moment," said the magister, "before I give you my hand.
- Don't be afraid, if I fall it won't matter. I know how to swim.
- I want to give you my hand.
As the magister bent over, he lunged forward, and either he had miscalculated his movement, or his body was numb from inaction, or the coal had failed under his weight, he slipped on the slope of the ascent and plunged headlong into the murky water. The lamp he was holding to give me light rolled after him and disappeared too. Instantly we were plunged into the dark night, and a scream escaped from all our chests at once. Luckily I was already in a position to get out, so I let myself go on my back and arrived in the water barely a second after the magister.
In my travels with Vitalis I had learnt enough to swim and dive to be as comfortable in the water as on dry land, but how could I find my way around this dark hole?
I hadn't thought about that when I let myself slip, I'd only thought about the magister who was about to drown, and with the instinct of a newfoundland I threw myself into the water.
Where to look? Which way should I reach? How to dive? That's what I was wondering when I felt a clutching hand grab me on the shoulder and pull me under. A good kick brought me to the surface: the hand hadn't let go.
Hold me tight, magister," I said, lifting my head and pressing down, "you're saved.
We were neither of us saved, because I didn't know which way to swim. An idea came to me.
"Speak up, you lot!
- Where are you, Rémi?
It was Uncle Gaspard's voice and it pointed me in the right direction. I had to turn left.
"Light a lamp.
Almost at once a flame appeared; I had only to stretch out my arm to touch the edge, I clutched a piece of coal with one hand and drew the magister to me.
For him it was high time, for he had been drinking and was already beginning to suffocate. I held his head above water and he soon came to.
Uncle Gaspard and Carrory, leaning forward, stretched out their arms towards us, while Pagès, lowered from his landing onto ours, shone his light on us. The magister, held in one hand by Uncle Gaspard and in the other by Carrory, was hoisted up to the landing while I pushed him from behind. Then, when he arrived, I went back up. He was already fully conscious.
Come here," he said, "so I can kiss you; you saved my life.
- You have already saved ours.
After this unpleasant incident, which had shaken us for a moment, we were soon shattered, and with it the idea of death. These ideas undoubtedly weighed more heavily on my comrades than on me, because, while they remained awake, in a state of stupid annihilation, I ended up falling asleep.
But the place was not favourable, and I was exposed to rolling in the water. Then the magister, seeing the danger I was in, took my head under his arm. He didn't hold me very tightly, but tight enough to prevent me from falling, and there I was like a child on its mother's lap. He was not only a man with a strong head, but also a good heart. When I was half-awake, he would just shift his numb arm, then immediately return to its still position, and half-heartedly he would say to me:
"Sleep, boy, don't be afraid, I've got you; sleep, little one.
And I went back to sleep without being afraid, because I knew he wouldn't let me go.
Time went by, and still regularly we heard the skips plunging into the water.
VI -- Rescue
Our position had become unbearable on our landing, which was too narrow; it was decided that the landing should be widened, and everyone set to work. We started digging in the coal with our knives and lowering the rubble.
As we now had a solid base under our feet, this work was easier, and we managed to cut into the seam to enlarge our prison.
It was a great relief when we were able to lie down without sitting with our legs dangling.
We stopped talking, so to speak, and as loquacious as we had been at the beginning of our captivity, we were silent as it dragged on.
The only subjects of our conversations revolved eternally around the same two questions: what means were used to get to us, and how long we had been imprisoned.
But these conversations no longer had the ardour of the first moments; if one of us said a word, it was often not raised, or when it was, it was simply in a few brief words; we could vary from day to night, from white to black, without arousing anger or simple contradiction.
"It's all right, we'll see.
Had we been buried for two days or six? We would see when the moment of deliverance came. But would that moment come? As far as I was concerned, I was beginning to doubt it very much,
Besides, I wasn't the only one, and sometimes my comrades would make comments that proved that they too were in doubt.
What consoles me, if I stay here," said Bergounhoux, "is that the company will provide an income for my wife and children; at least they won't be in charity.
Certainly, the magister had thought that it was part of his duties as chief not only to defend us against the accidents of the disaster, but also to protect us against ourselves. So when one of us seemed to be giving up, he immediately intervened with a comforting word.
"You won't be staying here any longer than the rest of us; the skips are working and the water is going down.
- Where is the water going?
- In the wells.
- And in the gallery?
- It'll come; we just have to wait.
- Say, Bergounhoux," interrupted Carrory with the aptness and promptness that characterised all his observations, "if the company goes bankrupt like the magister's, it's your wife who'll be robbed!
- Will you shut up, you fool! The company is rich.
- It was rich when it had the mine, but now that the mine is under water!"
With the exception of the magister, who hid his feelings, and Carrory, who felt little, we spoke no more of deliverance, and it was always the words of death and abandonment that rose to our lips from the heart.
"No matter what you say, magister, the skips will never draw enough water.
- I've already done the maths for you more than twenty times; just be patient.
If everything didn't work as well and as quickly as Pagès had hoped, it wasn't the fault of the engineers and workmen who were working on our rescue.
The descent that we had started to dig had been continued without a minute's rest. But the work was difficult.
The coal through which we were cutting our way was what miners call nervous, i.e. very hard, and as only one picker could work because of the narrowness of the gallery, we were obliged to often relieve those who were taking up this post, so ardent were they in their work.
At the same time, the ventilation of the gallery was poor; as the work progressed, tin pipes were placed, the joints of which were filled with clay; but, although a powerful hand fan sent air into these pipes, the lamps only burned in front of the pipe opening.
All this delayed the breakthrough and, on the seventh day since we sank, we had still only reached a depth of twenty metres. Under ordinary conditions, this breakthrough would have taken more than a month, but with the means at our disposal and the enthusiasm shown, it should have been quicker.
It took all the noble stubbornness of the engineer to continue this work, because, according to the unanimous opinion, it was unfortunately useless. All the sunken miners had perished. All that had to be done now was to continue dewatering them using the skips, and sooner or later all the corpses would be found. So what did it matter if they arrived a few hours earlier or a few hours later?
That was the opinion of competent people as well as the public; the parents themselves, the wives, the mothers, had gone into mourning. No one would ever get out of the Truyère alive again.
Without slowing down the dewatering work, which was proceeding without any interruptions other than those resulting from damage to the equipment, the engineer, despite universal criticism and the observations of his colleagues and friends, continued the descent.
He had the obstinacy and generous faith that led Columbus to find a new world.
Just one more day, my friends," he would say to the workers, "and if we don't have anything new tomorrow, we'll give up; I'm asking you for your comrades what I would ask for you if you were in their place.
The confidence that animated him passed into the hearts of his workers, who arrived shaken by the noise of the city and left sharing his convictions.
And with an admirable unity and activity, the descent deepened.
On the other hand, he had the passage to the lamp factory, which had collapsed in several places, lumbered, and in this way, by all possible means, he tried to wrest from the mine its terrible secret and its victims, if there were any still alive.
On the seventh day, during a change of shift, the picker arriving to cut into the coal thought he heard a slight noise, like soft blows; instead of lowering his pick, he held it up and stuck his ear to the coal. Then, thinking he was mistaken, he called one of his comrades to listen with him. Both remained silent, and after a moment a faint sound, repeated at regular intervals, reached them.
Immediately the news spread from mouth to mouth, meeting with more incredulity than faith, and reached the engineer, who rushed into the gallery.
At last, he had been right! There were men alive there whom his faith was going to save!
The engineer let out those who had followed him and even all the workmen who were making the chain to carry the spoil, keeping only the two pickers with him.
Then, holding their breath, they pressed themselves against the coal.
After a moment of waiting, they received a deep shock in their hearts: weak, hurried, rhythmic blows had responded to their own.
"Strike again with spaced blows to be quite sure that it is not the repercussion of your blows.
The picketers struck, and immediately the same rhythmic blows they had heard, i.e. the recall of the miners, answered theirs. There could be no doubt: men were alive and they could be saved.
The sounds they heard were so faint that it was impossible to determine the precise place from which they were coming. The indication, however, was sufficient to say that workers who had escaped the flood were in one of the three lifts in the flat gallery of the old works. It was no longer one descent that would meet the prisoners, but three, so as to reach all three lifts. When we're further advanced and can hear better, we'll abandon the useless descents and concentrate our efforts on the right one.
Work resumed with greater zeal, and it was up to the neighbouring companies to send their best spades to the Truyère.
In addition to the hope of digging the descents, there was also the hope of arriving via the gallery, as the water was dropping in the shaft.
As we climbed back up we heard the engineer's call, and the effect was the same as when we had heard the dewatering skips fall into the shafts.
"Saved!
It was a cry of joy that escaped our mouths, and without thinking we thought we were going to be given a hand.
Then, as with the buckets of exhaustion, after hope came despair.
The noise of the picks announced that the workers were still a long way off. Twenty metres, thirty metres perhaps. How long would it take to break through this massif? Our estimates varied: a month, a week, six days. How could we wait a month, a week, six days? Which of us would still be alive in six days? How many days had we already gone without eating?
The magister alone still spoke with courage, but in the long run our despondency overcame him, and in the long run weakness weakened his firmness.
If we could drink our fill, we could not eat, and hunger had become so tyrannical that we had tried to eat rotten wood crumbled in water.
Carrory, who was the hungriest of us all, had cut off his remaining boot and was continually chewing on bits of leather.
Seeing the extent to which hunger could drive my comrades, I confess that I gave in to a feeling of fear which, added to my other fears, made me uneasy. I had often heard Vitalis tell stories of shipwrecks, for he had travelled a great deal at sea, at least as much as on land, and, among these stories, there was one which, since hunger had been tormenting us, kept coming back to impose itself on my mind: in this story, some sailors had been thrown onto a sandy islet where there was no food whatsoever, and they had killed the cabin boy to eat him. As I listened to my companions crying out from hunger, I wondered whether a similar fate was in store for me, and whether, on our coal island, I too would not be killed to be eaten. In the magister and Uncle Gaspard, I was sure to find defenders; but Pagès, Bergounhoux and Carrory, Carrory especially, with his big white teeth that he sharpened on his pieces of boot, did not inspire any confidence in me.
Undoubtedly, these fears were crazy; but, in the situation in which we found ourselves, it was not cold, wise reason that directed our minds or our imaginations.
What added to our terrors was the absence of light. One by one, our lamps had run out of oil. And when there were only two left, the magister had decided that they would only be lit in circumstances where light was essential. So now we spent all our time in the dark.
Not only was this gloomy, it was also dangerous, because if we made a clumsy move, we could roll into the water.
There were only three of us on each landing, which gave us a bit more room: Uncle Gaspard was in one corner, the magister in another and I was in the middle.
From time to time we'd bang our heads against the wall to let our rescuers know we were alive, and we'd hear their picks pounding away at the coal without rest. But it was very slowly that their blows increased in strength, which meant that they were still a long way off.
When the lamp was lit I went down to fetch some water from the boot, and it seemed to me that the water in the hole had gone down a few centimetres.
"The water is going down.
- My God!"
And once again we were filled with hope.
Gradually, these noises became louder and louder; the water was receding and they were getting closer to us. But would we arrive in time? If the work of our rescuers was increasing from moment to moment, our weakness, from moment to moment too, was becoming greater and more painful: weakness of body, weakness of spirit. My comrades hadn't eaten since the day of the flood. And what was even more terrible was that we had only breathed air which, as it was not renewed, became less breathable and more unhealthy every day. Fortunately, as the water level dropped, so did the atmospheric pressure, for if it had remained at the same level as in the early hours, we would certainly have died of asphyxiation. In any case, if we were saved, it was due to the speed with which the rescue was ordered and organised.
The noise of the picks and buckets was as regular as a clockwork pendulum, and every interruption of the post gave us feverish emotions. Were we going to be abandoned, or were we facing insurmountable difficulties? During one of these interruptions, a tremendous noise was heard, a rumbling, a powerful murmur.
The water is falling into the mine," exclaimed Carrory.
- It's not water," said the magister.
- What is it?
- I don't know, but it's not water.
The pounding of the spikes had become more distinct, and they had certainly approached us in such a way as to reach us soon perhaps.
The water was still falling, and we soon had proof that it was no longer reaching the roof of the galleries.
We heard a scraping sound on the shale of the ascent and the water lapped as if small pieces of coal had fallen in.
We lit the lamp and saw rats running down the shaft. Like us, they had found refuge in an air bell, and when the water had receded, they had abandoned their shelter in search of food. If they had been able to reach us, it was because the water no longer filled the galleries to their full height.
These rats were for our prison what the dove was for Noah's ark: the end of the flood.
I wanted to go down to the bottom of our ascent to see the progress of the lowering of the waters. This progress was noticeable and now there was a big gap between the water and the roof of the gallery.
Catch us some rats," shouted Carrory, "so that we can eat them.
But to catch rats, you'd have to be more agile than me.
Yet hope had revived me, and the emptiness of the gallery inspired an idea that tormented me. I went back up to our landing.
"Magister, I've got an idea: since the rats are circulating in the gallery, it means we can get through; I'm going to swim to the ladders. I'll be able to call out, make myself heard, help save us too; they'll come and get us; it'll be quicker than going down."
The magister thought for a moment, then, taking my hand, said:
"I think you're trying to do the impossible, but it's not the first time the impossible has succeeded. Give us a kiss."
I kissed him and Uncle Gaspard, then, having left my clothes, I went down into the water.
You'll always shout," I said before starting to swim, "your voice will guide me.
What was the void beneath the roof of the gallery? Was it big enough for me to move freely? That was the question.
After a few fathoms, I found that I could swim slowly for fear of hitting my head: the adventure I was attempting was therefore possible. At the end, was it deliverance? Was it death?
I turned round and saw the glow of the lamp reflected in the black water; there I had a lighthouse.
Are you all right?" shouted the magister.
 -- Yes.
And I moved forward cautiously.
The difficulty with our ascent to the ladders lay in the direction to follow, for I knew that at one point, which was not very far away, there was a meeting of the galleries. We had to make sure we didn't get lost in the darkness. The roof and walls of the gallery were not enough to guide me, but I had a more reliable guide on the ground: the rails. If I followed them, I was sure to find the ladders.
From time to time, I would let my feet down and, after meeting the iron rods, I would slowly stand up again. With the rails under my feet and the voices of my comrades behind me, I wasn't lost.
The fading of the voices on one side, the louder noise of the exhaust bins on the other, told me that I was making progress. At last I would see the light of day again, and through me my comrades would be saved! That sustained my strength.
Advancing through the middle of the gallery, all I had to do was stand up straight to meet the rail, and most of the time I just touched it with my foot. During one of these movements, not having found it with my foot, I dived to look for it with my hands, but to no avail; I went from one wall of the gallery to the other and found nothing.
I had made a mistake.
For a moment I was paralysed by a poignant anguish, not knowing which way to turn. So I was lost, in this dark night, under this heavy vault, in this icy water.
But suddenly the sound of voices resumed and I knew which way to turn.
After going back a dozen fathoms, I dived and found the rail. So that was where the fork was. I looked for the plate, but didn't find it; I looked for the openings that must have been in the gallery; on both sides I found the wall. Where was the rail?
I followed it all the way; it suddenly stopped.
That's when I realised that the railway had been ripped up and overturned by the swirling waters, and that I no longer had a guide.
In these conditions, my project became impossible, and all I had to do was retrace my steps.
I had already travelled the route, I knew it was safe, and I swam quickly to get back to the ascent; the voices were guiding me.
As I got closer, it seemed to me that the voices were more confident, as if my comrades had gained new strength.
Soon I reached the entrance to the lift and shouted back.
Come on, come on," said the magister.
- I haven't found the passage.
- It doesn't matter; the descent is progressing, they can hear our cries, we can hear theirs; we'll soon be talking to each other.
I quickly climbed back up and listened. Indeed, the blows of the pick were much louder; and the cries of those working for our deliverance were still faint, but already quite distinct.
After the first movement of joy, I realised that I was freezing, but as there were no warm clothes to dry me off, I was buried up to my neck in the coals, which always retain a certain warmth, and Uncle Gaspard and the magister held me close. So I told them about my exploration and how I had lost the rails.
"Did you dare to dive?
- Why not? Unfortunately, I didn't find anything.
But, as the magister had said, it didn't matter now, because if we weren't saved by the gallery, we were going to be saved by the descent.
 The cries became distinct enough to give us hope that we would hear the words.
Indeed, we soon heard these three words slowly pronounced:
"How many are you?
Of all of us, Uncle Gaspard had the loudest and clearest voice. He was asked to answer.
"Six!
There was a moment's silence. No doubt they had hoped for a greater number outside.
Hurry up," shouted Uncle Gaspard, "we've had it!
- Your names?"
He said our names:
"Bergounhoux, Pagès, the magister, Carrory, Rémi, Gaspard.
For those outside, this was the most poignant moment of our rescue. When they heard that we were about to be contacted, all the relatives and friends of the sunken miners came running, and the soldiers had great difficulty containing them at the end of the gallery.
When the engineer announced that there were only six of us, there was painful disappointment, but there was still hope for everyone, because among these six could be the one we were waiting for.
He repeated our names.
Alas! out of a hundred and twenty mothers or wives, only four saw their hopes fulfilled. What pain, what tears!
For our part, we also thought of those who should have been saved.
"How many were saved?" asked Uncle Gaspard.
There was no answer.
There was one question that tormented me.
"Ask how long we've been here.
- Fourteen days.
Fourteen days! The one of us who had been the highest in his assessments had spoken of five or six days.
"You won't stay long now. Take courage. Don't talk any more, it delays the work. Just a few more hours.
These were, I think, the longest of our captivity, and certainly the most painful. It seemed to us that each spike would be our last; then, after that spike, came another, and after that another another.
From time to time the questions started again.
"Are you hungry?
- Yes, very hungry.
- Can you wait? If you're too weak, we'll make a hole in the tube and send you some broth, but that will delay your release; if you can wait, you'll be released more quickly.
- We'll wait, hurry up".
The buckets had not stopped working for a minute, and the water was dropping, still steadily.
Announce that the water is going down," said the magister.
- We know it's going down; either through the descent or the gallery, we'll be coming to you... soon."
The pick blows became less loud. They were obviously expecting a breakthrough at any moment and, as we had explained our position, they were afraid of causing a landslide which, falling on our heads, could injure or kill us, or throw us into the water, all mixed up with the rubble.
The magister explained to us that we also had to fear the expansion of the air, which, as soon as a hole was drilled, would rush in like a cannonball and overturn everything. So we have to be on our guard and look after ourselves as the spikers look after themselves.
The shaking caused to the massif by the pick blows loosened small pieces of coal at the top of the ascent, which rolled down the slope and were about to fall into the water.
Strangely enough, the closer we got to the moment of our deliverance, the weaker we became; I couldn't support myself and, lying in my small coal, it was impossible for me to lift myself on my arm; I was shaking and yet I wasn't cold any more.
Finally, a few larger pieces came loose and rolled between us. The opening had been made at the top of the ascent; we were blinded by the brightness of the lamps.
But instantly we fell back into the darkness; the draught, a terrible draught, a waterspout, carrying with it lumps of coal and debris of all kinds, had blown them away.
"It's the draught, don't be afraid, we'll light them up again outside. Just wait a bit.
Wait! Still waiting!
But at the same moment a great noise was made in the water of the gallery, and, having turned round, I saw a strong light walking on the lapping water.
"Courage! courage!" someone shouted.
And while we were managing to give a hand to the men on the upper landing from the descent, they were coming towards us from the gallery.
The engineer was in the lead; it was he who first climbed the ascent, and I was in his arms before I could say a word.
It was time, my heart failed me.
However, I was aware that I was being carried away; then, when we emerged from the flat gallery, that I was being wrapped in blankets.
I closed my eyes, but soon felt a glare that forced me to open them.
It was daylight. We were in the open air.
At the same time, a white body pounced on me: it was Capi, who had leapt into the engineer's arms and was licking my face. At the same time, I felt my right hand being taken and kissed. "Rémi!" said a faint voice (it was Mattia's). I looked around me, and then I saw a huge crowd that had packed into two rows, leaving a passage in the middle of the mass. The whole crowd was silent, for we had been told not to be moved by cries; but their attitude and their looks spoke for their lips.
Twenty arms stretched out to take me, but the engineer did not want to give in and, proud of his triumph, happy and superb, he carried me to the offices where beds had been prepared for us.
Two days later I was walking through the streets of Varses, followed by Mattia, Alexis and Capi, and everyone I passed stopped to look at me.
Some would come up to me and shake my hand with tears in their eyes.
And there were others who turned their heads away. They were in mourning and bitterly wondered why it was the orphaned child who had been saved, while the father of the family, the son, were still in the mine, miserable corpses dragged and tossed by the waters.
But some of the people who stopped me like that were really annoying; they invited me to dinner or to the café.
"You can tell us what you've been through", they said.
And I thanked them without accepting, because it didn't suit me to go and tell my story to indifferent people who thought they were paying me with a dinner or a glass of beer.
Besides, I liked listening better than telling, and I listened to Alexis and Mattia, who told me what had happened on earth while we were underground.
When I thought you were dead for me," said Alexis, "it broke my arms and legs, because I thought you were really dead.
- I never believed you were dead," said Mattia. I didn't know if you'd get out of the mine alive and if they'd arrive in time to save you, but I thought you hadn't let yourself drown, so if the rescue work went fast enough, they'd find you somewhere. So while Alexis mourned and wept for you, I gave myself a fever and said to myself: "He wasn't dead, but he might be dying". And I asked everyone: "How long can you live without eating? When will the water run out? When will the tunnel be pierced? But nobody gave me the answers I wanted. When you were asked your names and the engineer, after Carrory, shouted Rémi, I let myself go to the ground crying, and then they stepped on my body a little, but I didn't feel it, I was so happy."
I was very proud to see that Mattia had so much confidence in me that he didn't want to believe that I could die.
VII -- A music lesson
I had made friends in the mine. Such anguish, borne together, unites hearts; we suffer, we hope together, we are one.
Uncle Gaspard and the magister in particular had taken a liking to me; and although the engineer had not shared our imprisonment, he had attached himself to me like a child who had been snatched from death. He invited me to his house and, for his daughter's sake, I had to recount everything that had happened to us during our long burial in the ascent.
Everyone wanted to keep me in Varses.
Although I didn't want to work in the mines, it was not without sorrow that I left Varses, because I had to part with Alexis, Uncle Gaspard and the magister; but it was my destiny to part with those I loved and who showed me affection.
Onwards and upwards!
Harp on shoulder and bag on back, here we are again on the open road with Capi happily rolling in the dust.
I confess that it was not without a feeling of satisfaction, when we were out of Varses, that I stamped my foot on the sonorous road, which sounded different from the muddy floor of the mine. The good sun, the beautiful trees!
Before we set off, Mattia and I had discussed our route at length, for I had taught him to read maps, and he no longer imagined that distances were any longer for the legs that make a road than for the finger that, on a map, goes from one town to another. After weighing up the pros and cons, we decided that instead of going straight to Ussel and from there to Chavanon, we would go via Clermont, which wouldn't make our route much longer and which would give us the advantage of using the spa towns, which were full of sick people at the time: Saint-Nectaire, Le Mont-Dore, Royat, La Bourboule. While I was working as a wheelman, Mattia, on his excursion, had met a bear-showman who went to these water towns, where, he had said, you could earn money. Now Mattia wanted to earn money, finding that a hundred and fifty francs to buy a cow was not enough. The more money we had, the more beautiful the cow would be; and the more beautiful the cow, the happier Mother Barberin would be, and the happier Mother Barberin would be, the happier we would be.
So we had to head for Clermont.
On the way from Paris to Varses, I had begun Mattia's education, teaching him to read and also the first elements of music; from Varses to Clermont, I continued my lessons.
Either I wasn't a very good teacher -- which is quite possible -- or Mattia wasn't a good pupil -- which is also possible --, but progress in reading was slow and difficult.
No matter how hard Mattia tried and how much he glued his eyes to the book, he read all sorts of fanciful things that were more a credit to his imagination than to his attention.
Sometimes I became impatient and, banging on the book, I angrily exclaimed that Mattia's head was definitely too hard.
But in music the same difficulties had not arisen, and from the start Mattia had made such astonishing and remarkable progress that very soon he had come to astonish me with his questions; then, after having astonished me, he had embarrassed me, and finally he had more than once so taken me aback that I had remained short.
Then, when I didn't know what to answer, I got out of my predicament like Uncle Gaspard, when, when I asked him what coal was, he told me confidently: "It's coal found in the ground".
With no less confidence, I answered Mattia, when I had nothing to answer him:
"That's the way it is because that's the way it has to be; it's a law.
Mattia was not of a character to take exception to a law; only he had a way of looking at me, opening his mouth and widening his eyes, which did not make me at all proud of myself.
It had been three days since we left Varses, when he asked me just such a question. Instead of answering his why: "I don't know", I nobly replied: "Because it is".
Then he seemed preoccupied, and all day I couldn't get a word in edgeways, which was quite extraordinary with him, because he was always ready to chat and laugh.
I pressed him so hard that he finally spoke.
Certainly," he said, "you're a good teacher, and I don't think anyone would have taught me what I've learned like you, but..." He stopped.
He stopped.
"What, though?
- However, there may be things you don't know; that happens to the most learned, doesn't it? So, when you answer me: 'That's because it is', there might be other reasons to give that you don't give because they haven't been given to you. So, thinking along these lines, I said to myself that, if you wanted, we could perhaps buy, oh so cheaply, a book containing the principles of music.
- That's only fair.
- It is, isn't it? I thought it would seem fair to you, because after all you can't know everything there is to know in books, because you haven't learnt from books.
- A good teacher is better than the best book.
- If you wanted, I'd go and ask a real teacher for a lesson, just one, and then he'd have to tell me everything I don't know.
- Why didn't you take the lesson from a real master when you were on your own?
- Because real masters have to be paid, and I wouldn't have wanted to take the price of this lesson out of your money.
I was hurt that Mattia should talk to me like that about a real master; but my foolish vanity could not resist these last words.
You are too good a boy," I said; "my money is your money, since you earn it as I do, better than I do, very often; you can take as many lessons as you like, and I will take them with you.
Then I bravely added this admission of my ignorance:
"That way I too can learn what I don't know.
The master, the real master that we needed, was not a village minstrel, but an artist, a great artist, such as you only find in major cities. The map told me that before reaching Clermont the most important town on our route was Mende. Was Mende really an important town? That was what I didn't know; but, as the typeface in which its name was written on the map gave it that importance, I could only believe my map.
It was therefore decided that we would spend the considerable cost of a music lesson in Mende; for, although our income would be more than mediocre in these sad mountains of the Lozère, where villages are rare and poor, I did not want to delay Mattia's joy any longer.
After crossing the whole of the Causse Méjean, which is indeed the most desolate and miserable country in the world, with no woods, no water, no crops, no villages, no inhabitants, nothing to do with life, but with immense and bleak solitudes that can only have charms for those who travel through them quickly by car, we finally arrived in Mende.
As it had already been dark for a few hours, we couldn't go that evening to take our lesson; besides, we were dead tired.
However, Mattia was so anxious to know whether Mende, which did not seem to him to be the important town I had told him about, had a music teacher that, while we were having dinner, I asked the mistress of the inn where we were staying if there was a good musician in the town who gave music lessons.
She replied that she was very surprised by our question: didn't we know Mr Espinassous?
We've come a long way," I said.
- How far, then?
- Italy," replied Mattia.
Then her astonishment disappeared, and she seemed to admit that, coming from so far away, we could not know Mr Espinassous; but certainly, if we had only come from Lyon or Marseille, she would not have continued to answer to people who were ill-educated enough not to have heard of Mr Espinassous.
"I hope we've come to the right place," I said to Mattia in Italian.
"Do you think he'll want to see us tomorrow morning?
- Of course; he welcomes everyone, when they have money in their pockets, that is.
When we arrived in front of the house that had been indicated to us as the professor's, we thought we had made a mistake, because in front of the house there were two small copper bearded dishes, which was never the sign of a music master.
We entered. The shop was divided into two equal parts: in the one on the right, on boards, were brushes, combs, jars of ointment and soaps; in the one on the left, on a workbench and against the wall, were musical instruments, violins, piston horns and slide trumpets.
"Mr Espinassous?" asked Mattia.
A small, lively man, wriggling like a bird, who was in the process of shaving a peasant sitting in an armchair, replied in a low voice:
"It's me.
I glanced at Mattia to tell him that the barber-musician was not the man to give us our lesson, and that it would be throwing our money out of the window to go to him; but, instead of understanding and obeying me, Mattia went and sat down on a chair, and with a deliberate air:
"Will you cut my hair when you have shaved the gentleman?
- Certainly, young man, and I'll shave you too, if you like.
- Thank you," said Mattia; he gave me a sidelong glance to tell me to wait a moment before getting angry.
Soon Espinassous had finished shaving his peasant and, towel in hand, came to cut Mattia's hair.
Sir," said Mattia as the towel was being tied around his neck, "my friend and I are having a discussion and, as we know that you are a famous musician, we think that you would like to give us your opinion on what is bothering us.
- Tell us what's bothering you, young people.
I understood what Mattia was getting at: first he wanted to see if this wigmaker-musician was capable of answering his questions, and then, if his answers were satisfactory, he wanted to have his music lesson for the price of a haircut; Mattia was definitely clever.
Why," asked Mattia, "do you tune a violin to certain notes and not to others?
I thought that the wigmaker, who at that very moment was combing through Mattia's long hair, was going to give an answer like mine, and I was already laughing out loud when he said:
"The second string on the left of the instrument must give the A at the normal pitch, so the other strings must be tuned so that they give the notes from fifth to fifth, i.e. G, fourth string; D, third string; A, second string; E, first string or chanterelle.
It wasn't me who laughed, it was Mattia; was he laughing at my amazement? Was he simply happy to know what he had wanted to learn?
As long as he was cutting his hair, Mattia never ran out of questions, and the barber answered everything that was asked of him with the same ease and certainty as when he was playing the violin.
But when he had done so, he began to ask questions himself, and soon knew what we had come to see him about.
Then he laughed out loud:
These are good kids," he said, "aren't they funny!
Then he wanted Mattia, who was obviously much funnier than I was, to play him a piece; and Mattia, bravely taking up his violin, began to play a waltz.
"And you don't know a note of music!" cried the wigmaker, clapping his hands and addressing Mattia as if he had known him for a long time.
This kid is a prodigy!" cried Espinassous. If you want to stay with me, I'll make a great musician of you, you hear, a great musician! In the morning, you'll shave the practice with me, and the rest of the day I'll make you work; and don't think that I'm not a master capable of teaching you because I'm a wigmaker; you have to live, eat, drink, sleep, and that's what the razor is good for. Jasmin is no less the greatest poet in France for giving people beards; Agen has Jasmin, Mende has Espinassous.
Hearing the end of this speech, I looked at Mattia. What was he going to say? Was I going to lose my friend, my comrade, my brother, just as I had lost all those I had loved in succession? My heart sank. But I didn't give in to this feeling.
The situation resembled to some extent that which I had found with Vitalis when Mrs Milligan had asked to keep me close to her; I did not want to have to address to myself the same reproaches as Vitalis.
"Think only of yourself, Mattia," I said in a voice full of emotion.
But he came quickly to me and, taking my hand, said:
"I could never leave my friend. Thank you, sir.
Espinassous insisted, saying that, when Mattia had had his first education, we would find a way of sending him to Toulouse, then to Paris to the Conservatoire; but Mattia always replied:
"Never leave Rémi!
- Well, kid, I want to do something for you," said Espinassous, "I want to give you a book where you can learn what you don't know.
And he started looking in the drawers. After a long time, he found this book entitled Theory of Music; it was quite old, quite worn, quite crumpled, but what did it matter?
So, taking a pen, he wrote on the first page: "Offered to the child who, becoming an artist, will remember the wigmaker of Mende".
I don't know if there were any other music teachers in Mende than the barber Espinassous, but this is the one I knew and whom Mattia and I have never forgotten.
VIII -- The Prince's cow
I liked Mattia when we arrived in Mende, but when we left the town I liked him even more. Is there anything better, anything sweeter for friendship than to feel with certainty that you are loved by those you love?
And what greater proof could Mattia have given me of his affection than to refuse, as he had done, Espinassous' offer of tranquillity, security, well-being, education in the present and fortune in the future, to share my adventurous and precarious existence, with no future and perhaps even no tomorrow?
I had not been able to tell him in front of Espinassous the emotion that his cry of "Leave my friend" had aroused in me, but when we went out I took his hand and shook it:
You know," I said, "that it's life and death between us?
He began to smile, looking at me with his big eyes.
"I knew that before today," he said.
Mattia, who up until then had taken very little interest in reading, made surprising progress the day he read Kuhn's Theory of Music. Unfortunately I couldn't get him to work as hard as I would have liked and as he himself would have liked, because we were obliged to walk from morning to night, taking long stages to cross as quickly as possible the Lozère and Auvergne regions, which are not very hospitable for singers and musicians. In these poor lands, the peasant who earns little is not inclined to put his hand in his pocket; he listens placidly to everything that is played, but when he foresees that the collection is about to begin, he leaves or closes his door.
Finally, via Saint-Flour and Issoire, we arrived at the water villages that were the goal of our expedition, and fortunately it turned out that the bear-watcher's information was true: at La Bourboule, and especially at Mont-Dore, we made good money.
To be fair, I have to say that it was mainly Mattia to whom we owed them, to his skill and tact. As for me, when I saw people gathered together, I would pick up my harp and start playing as best I could, it's true, but with a certain indifference. Mattia did not proceed in this primitive way; as for him, it was not enough for people to be gathered for him to start playing straight away. Before picking up his violin or his cornet, he studied his audience, and it didn't take him long to work out whether he would play or not, and above all what he had to play.
At the school of Garofoli, who exploited public charity to the full, he had learnt all the subtleties of the difficult art of forcing people's generosity or sympathy. From the first time I met him in his attic in the rue de Lourcine, he had surprised me by explaining to me the reasons why passers-by decide to put their hand in their pocket; but he surprised me even more when I saw him at work.
It was in the water cities that he deployed all his skill, and for the Parisian public, his old public whom he had got to know and whom he found again there.
Careful!" he would say to me when we saw a young lady in mourning coming towards us in the alleys of the Capucin, "it's sadness that you have to play, let's try to soften her up and make her think of the one she has lost; if she cries, our fortune is made.
And we began to play with such slow movements that it was heartbreaking.
There are places on the promenades around Le Mont-Dore that are called salons: they are groups of trees, quincunxes under the shade of which bathers spend a few hours in the open air. Mattia studied the public in these lounges, and it was on the basis of his observations that we arranged our repertoire.
When we saw a patient sitting melancholically in a chair, pale, with glassy eyes and sunken cheeks, we were careful not to go and stand in front of him to rouse him from his sad thoughts. We began to play away from him as if we were playing for ourselves alone, conscientiously applying ourselves. Out of the corner of our eyes we watched him; if he looked at us angrily, we went away; if he seemed to be listening to us with pleasure, we came closer, and Capi could boldly present his begging bowl without fear of being kicked away.
But it was above all with the children that Mattia achieved his greatest successes; with his bow he gave them legs to dance with, and with his smile he made them laugh even when they were in a bad mood. How did he do it? I don't know. But that's how it was: they liked him, they loved him.
The result of our campaign was truly marvellous; all our expenses paid, we soon earned sixty-eight francs.
Sixty-eight francs plus the one hundred and forty-six we had in cash, that made two hundred and fourteen francs; the time had come to head for Chavanon without further delay, passing through Ussel where, we were told, an important livestock fair was to be held.
A fair was our business; we were finally going to be able to buy that famous cow that we talked about so often and for which we had saved so much money.
Up until then, we'd had nothing but the pleasure of cherishing our dream and making it as beautiful as our imagination would allow: our cow would be white, that was Mattia's wish; she would be redheaded, that was mine, in memory of our poor Roussette; she would be gentle, she would have several buckets of milk; it was all superb and charming.
But now we had to move on from daydreaming to execution, and that was where the embarrassment began.
How could we choose our cow with the certainty that she would really have all the qualities we were so fond of adorning her with? This was a serious matter. What a responsibility! I didn't know what signs a good cow had, and Mattia was as ignorant as I was.
What made us even more worried were the astonishing stories we'd heard in the inns since we'd had the bright idea of buying a cow. A horse or cow dealer is a craftsman of tricks and deceit.
Among the stories we had been told, there was one in which a vet played a terrible role, at least with regard to the cow trader. If we took on a vet to help us, it would undoubtedly be an expense for us, but how reassuring it would be!
In the midst of our embarrassment, we decided on this option, which seemed the wisest from every point of view, and we cheerfully continued on our way.
It's not a long way from Le Mont-Dore to Ussel; it took us two days to make the journey, but we arrived in Ussel early.
It was in Ussel that I had made my first public appearance in Le Domestique de M. Joli-Cœur, or Le plus bête des deux n'est pas celui qu'on pense, and it was also in Ussel that Vitalis had bought me my first pair of shoes, those studded shoes that had made me so happy.
Poor Joli-Coeur, he was no longer there, in his handsome red English general's uniform, and Zerbino and sweet Dolce were also missing.
Poor Vitalis! I had lost him and I would never see him again, walking with his head held high, his chest arched, keeping time with both arms and both feet as he played a waltz on his piercing fife.
Out of the six of us, only two were left standing: Capi and I. This made my entry into Ussel all the more melancholy. In spite of myself, I imagined that I was going to see Vitalis' felt hat on every street corner and that I was going to hear the call that had sounded in my ears so many times: "Forward!
After dropping off our bags and instruments at the inn where Vitalis and I were staying, we set off in search of a vet.
"And why on earth do you want a cow?" asked the vet.
In a few words, I explained what I wanted to do with the cow.
You're good boys," he said, "I'll go to the fair with you tomorrow morning, but if you want to buy, you have to be in a position to pay.
Without answering, I untied a handkerchief in which our treasure was locked.
"It's perfect, come and get me tomorrow morning at seven o'clock.
At seven o'clock we found the vet waiting for us, and we went back to the fairground with him, explaining once again what qualities we required in the cow we were going to buy.
They could be summed up in two words: give lots of milk and eat little.
Here's one that must be good," said Mattia, pointing to a white cow.
- I think this one is better," I said, pointing to a redhead.
The vet agreed with us, not stopping at either of them, but going on to a third: it was a small cow with spindly legs, red fur, brown ears and cheeks, black-rimmed eyes and a whitish circle around the muzzle.
"Here's a Rouergue cow that's just what you need," he said.
A puny-looking peasant was holding her by the tether; it was to him that the vet turned to ask how much he wanted to sell the cow.
"Three hundred francs.
We had already won over this alert, slender little cow, with a wicked face, and our arms fell from our bodies.
Three hundred francs! that wasn't our business at all. I waved to the vet to tell him that we should move on to another one; he waved back to tell me that we should persevere.
Then a discussion broke out between him and the farmer. He offered one hundred and fifty francs; the farmer offered ten francs less. The vet went up to one hundred and seventy; the farmer went down to two hundred and eighty.
But when we got to this point, things didn't go on like this, which had given us good hope. Instead of offering, the vet began to examine the cow in detail: her legs were too weak, her neck too short, her horns too long; she lacked lungs and her udder was not well shaped.
The farmer replied that, since we knew so much about it, he would give us his cow for two hundred and fifty francs, so that she would be in good hands.
We were both frightened, thinking it was a bad cow.
"Let's go and see some more," I said.
At this word the farmer, making an effort, reduced the price by another ten francs.
Finally, from reduction to reduction, he arrived at two hundred and ten francs, but he stayed there.
The vet had elbowed us to make us understand that everything he was saying was not serious and that the cow, far from being bad, was excellent; but two hundred and ten francs was a large sum for us.
In the meantime Mattia, turning round behind the cow, had pulled out a long hair from its tail, and the cow had kicked it.
This convinced me.
"Go for two hundred and ten francs," I said, thinking that was the end of it.
Did you bring a halter?" said the farmer; "I'm selling the cow, not her halter.
However, as we were friends, he was willing to give me the halter for thirty cents, which wasn't expensive.
We needed a halter to drive our cow; I gave up the thirty cents, calculating that we would still have twenty left.
Where is your lead rope?" asked the farmer; "I sold you the halter, I didn't sell you the lead rope.
The lead rope cost us twenty sous, our last twenty sous.
And when they were paid, the cow was finally delivered to us with its halter and loin.
We had a cow, but we didn't have a penny left, not a single penny to feed her or ourselves.
We're going to work," said Mattia, "the cafés are full of people; if we divide up we can play in all of them, we'll have a good income this evening.
And after taking our cow to the stable of our inn, where we tied her up with several knots, we set to work each on our own, and in the evening, when we counted up our takings, I found that Mattia's was four francs fifty centimes and mine three francs.
With seven francs fifty centimes we were rich.
But the joy of having earned those seven and a half francs was very small compared to the joy we felt at having spent two hundred and fourteen of them.
We persuaded the kitchen maid to milk our cow, and we dined on her milk: it was the best we had ever drunk; Mattia said it was sweet and smelt of orange blossom, like the milk he had drunk in hospital, but much better.
And in our enthusiasm we went and kissed our cow on her black hoof; no doubt she was sensitive to this caress, for she licked our faces with her rough tongue.
"You know she kisses," exclaimed a delighted Mattia.
To understand how happy we were to kiss our cow and to be kissed by her, you have to remember that neither Mattia nor I were spoiled by being kissed; our lot was not that of pampered children who have to defend themselves against their mothers' caresses, and yet both of us would have loved to be caressed.
The next morning we were up with the sun, and immediately set off for Chavanon.
My intention, so as not to tire our cow, and also so as not to arrive too late at Chavanon, was to go and sleep in the village where I had spent the first night of my journey with Vitalis, in the fern bed where good Capi, seeing my sorrow, had come to lie down beside me and put his paw in my hand to tell me that he would be my friend. From there we would leave the next morning, arriving early at Mother Barberin's house.
But fate, which until then had been so favourable to us, turned against us and changed our plans.
We had decided to divide our day's walk into two parts, and to cut it short with our lunch, especially our cow's lunch, which would consist of grass from the ditches along the road that she would graze.
Around ten o'clock, having found a place where the grass was green and thick, we put the sacks down and let our cow down into the ditch.
At first I wanted to hold her by the tether, but she was so quiet, and above all so devoted to grazing, that I soon twisted the tether around her horns and sat down beside her to eat my bread.
Naturally, we finished eating long before she did. Then, after admiring her for quite a long time, not knowing what else to do, Mattia and I began to play marbles, for you mustn't think that we were two serious little fellows, thinking only of making money.
We had finished playing before the cow had finished grazing, and when she saw us coming towards her, she started mowing the grass with her tongue, as if to tell us that she was still hungry.
Let's wait a bit," said Mattia.
- Don't you know that a cow eats all day long?
- Just a little.
While we waited, we picked up our bags and instruments.
"We had a cow in the Gassot circus, and she loved music.
And without asking for more, Mattia began to play a parade fanfare.
At the first notes, our cow raised her head; then suddenly, before I could throw myself at her horns to grab her tether, she took off at a gallop.
And immediately we set off after her, galloping as hard as we could and calling her name. I shouted to Capi to stop her, but you can't have all the talents: a drover's dog would have jumped on our cow's nose; Capi, who was a savant, jumped on her legs.
It was about two kilometres before reaching a large village that we had stopped to eat, and it was towards this village that our cow was galloping. She naturally entered the village before us and, as the road was straight, we could see, despite the distance, that people were blocking her path and grabbing her.
As we went along, the number of people around our cow increased, and when we finally got close to her, there were about twenty men, women and children, all chatting as they watched us come.
I had imagined that all I had to do was claim my cow, but instead of giving it to me, they surrounded us and asked us question after question: where did we come from? and then, where did we get this cow?
Our answers were as simple as they were easy; however, they did not persuade these people, and two or three voices were raised to say that we had stolen the cow that had escaped us, and that we should be put in prison until the matter was cleared up.
I turned pale and stammered and, as our run had made my breath catch, I was unable to defend myself.
In the meantime, a policeman arrived; in a few words we told him about our affair, and, as it didn't seem clear to him, he declared that he was going to impound our cow and put us in prison; we would see later.
I wanted to protest, Mattia wanted to speak, the gendarme sternly imposed silence on us; then, remembering Vitalis' scene with the Toulouse police officer, I told Mattia to keep quiet and to follow the gendarme.
The whole village followed us to the town hall, where the prison was; they surrounded us, pressed us, pushed us, stuffed us, swore at us, and I think that if it hadn't been for the gendarme, who was protecting us, they would have stoned us to death as if we were guilty criminals, murderers or arsonists. And yet we hadn't committed any crime. But crowds are often like that; they go by first appearances and turn against the unfortunate, without knowing what they have done, whether they are guilty or innocent.
We were in prison. For how long?
As I asked myself this question, Mattia came and stood in front of me, bowing his head:
"Hit me," he said, "hit me on the head, you'll never hit me hard enough for my stupidity.
- You did something stupid and I let it happen, I was as stupid as you are.
- I'd rather you hit me, I'd have less grief... our poor cow, the prince's cow!"
And he began to cry.
Then it was up to me to console him by explaining that our position was not very serious; we had done nothing, and it would not be difficult for us to prove that we had bought our cow; the good vet from Ussel would be our witness.
"And if we were accused of stealing the money with which we paid for our cow, how would we prove that we had earned it?
Mattia was right.
And then," said Mattia, continuing to cry, "when we get out of this prison, when they give us back our cow, is it certain that we'll find Mother Barberin?
- Why shouldn't we?
- Since you left her, she could have died.
I was struck to the heart by this fear. It was true that Mother Barberin could have died, for although I was not of an age where the idea of death is easily accepted, I knew from experience that we can lose those we love; had I not lost Vitalis? How could this idea not have occurred to me before?
"Why didn't you tell me this before?
- Because when I'm happy, I only have happy ideas in my stupid head, whereas when I'm unhappy, I only have sad ideas. And I was so happy at the thought of offering your cow to your mother Barberin that I could only see mother Barberin's contentment, I could only see ours and I was dazzled, as if intoxicated."
Surely it was the influence of prison that inspired these sad thoughts, it was the cries of the crowd, it was the gendarme, it was the sound of the lock and bolts when the door was shut on us.
However, I tried to comfort Mattia by explaining to him that we were going to be questioned.
"Well, what will we say?
- We'll tell the truth.
- Then we'll put you in Barberin's hands, or if Mother Barberin is at home alone, we'll question her too to find out if we're not lying: then we won't be able to surprise her.
At last our door opened with a terrible clang, and we saw an old white-haired gentleman enter, whose open and kind air immediately gave us hope.
Come on, you rascals, get up," said the jailer, "and answer the Justice of the Peace.
- That's fine, that's fine," said the justice of the peace, motioning to the gaoler to leave him alone, "I'll take care of questioning this one -- he pointed to me -- take the other one away and keep him; I'll question him afterwards.
I thought that in these circumstances I should warn Mattia of what he had to answer.
Like me, Mr Justice of the Peace," I said, "he will tell you the truth, the whole truth.
- That's good, that's good", the Justice of the Peace interrupted sharply, as if he wanted to cut me off.
Mattia left, but before he did he had time to give me a quick glance to let me know that he had understood me.
"You are accused of stealing a cow", said the Justice of the Peace, looking me in the eye.
I replied that we had bought the cow at the Ussel fair and named the vet who had assisted us in the purchase.
"It will be checked.
- I hope so, because it will be this verification that will prove our innocence.
- And why did you buy a cow?
- To take it to Chavanon and give it to the woman who was my nurse, in recognition of her care and in memory of my affection for her.
- And what is this woman's name?
- Mother Barberin.
- Is she the wife of a bricklayer who, a few years ago, was crippled in Paris?
- Yes, Mr Justice of the Peace.
- That too will be verified.
But I didn't respond to these words as I had done to the vet from Ussel.
Seeing my embarrassment, the Justice of the Peace pressed me with questions, and I had to reply that if he questioned Mother Barberin, the aim we had set ourselves would have been missed, and there would be no more surprises.
However, in the midst of my embarrassment, I felt a keen sense of satisfaction: since the Justice of the Peace knew Mother Barberin and would ask her about the truth or falsity of my story, this proved that Mother Barberin was still alive.
I soon felt an even greater sense of satisfaction; in the midst of these questions, the justice of the peace told me that Barberin had returned to Paris some time ago.
This made me so happy that I found some persuasive words to convince him that the veterinary surgeon's statement should be enough to prove that we had not stolen our cow.
"And where did you get the money to buy the cow?
This was the question that had so frightened Mattia when he had anticipated that it would be addressed to us.
"We earned it.
- Where? How?"
I explained how, from Paris to Varses and from Varses to Le Mont-Dore, we had earned it and amassed it penny by penny.
"And what were you going to do in Varses?
When the justice of the peace heard that I had been buried in the Truyère mine, he stopped me, and in a voice that was all softened, almost friendly:
"Which of you is Rémi?
- Me, Mr Justice of the Peace.
- Who can prove it? The gendarme said you had no papers.
- No, Mr Justice of the Peace.
- Come on, tell me how the disaster at Varses happened. I've read about it in the papers; if you're not really Rémi, you can't fool me. I'm listening, so pay attention.
Being on familiar terms with the Justice of the Peace had given me courage; I could see that he was not hostile to us.
When I had finished telling my story, the justice of the peace looked at me for a long time with gentle, tender eyes. I thought he was going to tell me that he was giving us back our freedom, but it was not to be. Without speaking to me, he left me alone. No doubt he was going to question Mattia to see if our two stories would match.
I was left to my own thoughts for quite a long time, but in the end the justice of the peace returned with Mattia.
I'm going to get some information from Ussel," he said, "and if, as I hope, it confirms your story, you'll be released tomorrow.
- And our cow?" asked Mattia.
- We'll give her back to you.
- That's not what I meant," replied Mattia; "who's going to feed her? who's going to milk her?
- Don't worry, kid.
Mattia was also reassured.
If they milk our cow," he said, smiling, "couldn't they give us the milk? It would be good for our supper.
As soon as the justice of the peace had left, I told Mattia the two great pieces of news that had made me forget that we were in prison: Mother Barberin was alive, and Barberin was in Paris.
"The Prince's cow will make its triumphal entry," said Mattia.
And in his joy he began to dance and sing; I took his hands, carried away by his gaiety, and Capi, who until then had remained in a corner, sad and worried, came to stand in the middle of us on his two hind legs. We then gave ourselves over to such a beautiful dance that the caretaker, frightened, came to see if we were not rebelling.
He told us to be quiet, but he didn't speak to us roughly as he had done when he came in with the justice of the peace.
From this we understood that our position was not bad, and soon we had proof that we had not been mistaken, for he soon returned bringing us a large bowl full of milk, the milk of our cow. But that* *was not all; with the terrine he gave us a large loaf of white bread and a piece of cold veal which, he told us, had been sent to us by the Justice of the Peace.
IX -- Mother Barberin
Our night on the cot was not bad; we had spent some less pleasant ones under the stars.
I dreamt of the cow coming in," said Mattia.
- And so did I."
At eight o'clock in the morning our door opened, and we saw the Justice of the Peace enter, followed by our friend the veterinary surgeon, who had come himself to set us free.
As for the Justice of the Peace, his concern for two innocent prisoners was not limited to the dinner he had given us the day before: he handed me a nice piece of stamped paper.
"Here's a passport that I had the mayor issue for you; it will be your safeguard from now on. Bon voyage, children!
And he shook our hands; as for the vet, he kissed us.
We had entered the village miserably; we left triumphantly, leading our cow by the tether and walking with our heads held high. The peasants standing in their doorways gave us good looks.
It wasn't long before we reached the village where I had slept with Vitalis; from there we only had to cross a large moor to reach the hill that descends to Chavanon.
"You know I promised you crêpes at Mum Barberin's, but to make crêpes you need butter, flour and eggs.
- They must be delicious.
- I do believe it's good, you'll see; you can roll it up and stuff it in your mouth; but perhaps there's no butter or flour at mère Barberin's, because she's not rich; what if we got her some?
- That's a great idea.
- So hold on to the cow, and don't let go; I'm going to go into that grocer's and buy some butter and flour. As for the eggs, if Mother Barberin doesn't have any, she'll borrow some, because we might break them on the way.
I would have preferred not to hurry our cow, but I was in such a hurry to get there that despite myself I lengthened my stride.
Another ten kilometres, another eight, another six; oddly enough, the road seemed longer to me, as I got closer to Mother Barberin, than the day I had left her, and yet, on that day, it was raining cold rain, the memory of which had stayed with me.
But I was all excited and feverish, and I kept looking at the time on my watch.
Isn't this a beautiful country?" I said to Mattia.
- It's not the trees that get in the way.
- When we go down the hill towards Chavanon, you'll see trees, beautiful trees, oak trees, chestnut trees!
- With chestnuts?
- You bet! And then, in mère Barberin's courtyard, there's a crooked pear tree on which we play horse, which produces pears this big, and good; you'll see."
Talking like this and still walking briskly, we had reached the top of the hill where the hill begins, which leads up several hairpin bends to Chavanon, passing in front of mère Barberin's house.
A few more steps and we'd reached the place where I'd asked Vitalis for permission to sit on the parapet and look at Mother Barberin's house, which I thought I'd never see again.
"Take the tether," I said to Mattia.
And with a leap I jumped onto the parapet; nothing had changed in our valley; it still looked the same; between its two clumps of trees I could see the roof of Mother Barberin's house.
At that moment, a small flake of yellow smoke rose above the chimney and, as there was no wind, it went straight up into the air along the side of the hill.
"Mother Barberin is home," I said.
A light breeze blew through the trees and, knocking down the column of smoke, threw it in our faces: the smoke smelt of oak leaves.
Suddenly I felt tears fill my eyes and, jumping down from the parapet, I embraced Mattia. Capi threw himself on top of me and, taking him in my arms, I kissed him too. Mattia went to kiss the cow on the forehead.
Let's go down quickly," I said.
- If Mother Barberin is at home, how are we going to arrange our surprise?
- You'll go in alone; you'll say that you're bringing her a cow from the prince, and when she asks you which prince it is, I'll appear."
As we reached one of the bends in the road just above Mother Barberin's house, we saw a white cap appear in the courtyard: it was Mother Barberin.
We had stopped and I had shown her to Mattia.
She's leaving," he said, "and what about our surprise?
- We'll invent another one.
- What surprise?
- I don't know what it is.
- Why don't you call her?
The temptation was strong, but I resisted; for several months I had been looking forward to a surprise, I couldn't give it up all of a sudden.
It wasn't long before we arrived at the gate of my old house, and we entered as I used to.
Knowing Mother Barberin's habits well, I knew that the gate would only be closed at the latch and that we could enter the house, but first we had to put our cow in the stable. So I went to see what state the stable was in, and found it just as it had been in the old days, cluttered only with faggots. I called Mattia, and after tying up our cow in front of the trough, we busied ourselves with cramming these bundles into a corner, which did not take long, as Mother Barberin's supply of wood was not very abundant.
Now," I said to Mattia, "we're going to go into the house; I'll sit by the fire so that Mother Barberin can find me there. As the gate will squeak when she pushes it to get in, you'll have time to hide behind the bed with Capi, and she'll only see me; do you think she'll be surprised!"
This is how things worked out. We entered the house, and I went to sit by the fireplace, where I had spent so many winter evenings. As I couldn't cut my long hair, I hid it under the collar of my jacket and, curling up, I made myself as small as possible to resemble Rémi, Mother Barberin's little Rémi.
I could see the fence from where I was sitting, and there was no need to worry about Mother Barberin coming up on us unexpectedly.
Thus installed, I could look around me. It seemed to me that I had left the house only the day before: nothing had changed, everything was in the same place; and the paper with which a tile I had broken had been mended had not been replaced, even though it was terribly smoky and yellowed.
If I had dared to leave my place, I would have enjoyed seeing every object up close; but, as Mother Barberin could appear at any moment, I had to remain under observation.
Suddenly I saw a white hat; at the same time the hart supporting the barrier cracked.
"Hide quickly", I said to Mattia.
I made myself smaller and smaller.
The door opened and Mother Barberin saw me from the threshold.
"Who's there?" she said.
I looked at her without answering, and she looked back at me.
Suddenly her hands began to tremble.
My God," she whispered, "my God, is it possible, Rémi!
I got up and ran to her, taking her in my arms.
"Mummy!
- My boy, it's my boy!
It took us several minutes to recover and to wipe our eyes.
Of course," she said, "if I hadn't always been thinking about you, I wouldn't have recognised you.
A muffled sniff reminded me that Mattia was hidden behind the bed, so I called to him.
This is Mattia," I said, "my brother.
- So you've found your parents, have you?" exclaimed Mother Barberin.
- No, I mean he's my comrade, my friend, and here's Capi, my comrade too and my friend; give my regards to your master's mother, Capi!
Capi stood up on his two hind legs, and, putting one of his front legs over his heart, he bowed gravely, which made Mother Barberin laugh a lot and dried her tears.
Mattia, who did not have the same reasons for forgetting himself as I did, beckoned to me to remind me of our surprise.
If you wanted," I said to Mother Barberin, "we could go out into the courtyard for a bit, to see the crooked pear tree that I've often told Mattia about.
- We can also go and look at your garden, because I've kept it just as you arranged it, so that you'll find it again when you come back, because I've always believed, against all the odds, that you'd come back."
The time had come.
And the cow shed," I said, "has it changed since poor Roussette left, who was like me and didn't want to leave?
- No, of course not, I put my bundles there.
As we were just in front of the barn, Mother Barberin pushed open the door, and instantly our cow, who was hungry and no doubt thought she was being fed, began to bellow.
"A cow, a cow in the stable!" cried Mother Barberin.
Mattia and I couldn't stand it any longer and burst out laughing.
Mother Barberin looked at us astonished, but it was such an improbable thing to have a cow in the stable that, despite our laughter, she didn't understand.
"I didn't want to come back empty-handed to Mother Barberin, who had been so good to her little Rémi, the abandoned child; so, looking for something that might be most useful, I thought it would be a cow to replace the Roussette, and at the Ussel fair we bought that one with the money Mattia and I earned.
- Oh, what a good boy, what a dear boy!" exclaimed Mère Barberin as she kissed me.
Then we went into the stable so that Mother Barberin could examine our cow, which was now her cow. Every time Mother Barberin made a discovery, she exclaimed with delight and admiration.
"What a beautiful cow!
Suddenly she stopped and looked at me:
"You've become rich, then?
- I think so," said Mattia, laughing, "we've got fifty-eight sous left.
And Mother Barberin repeated her refrain, but with a variation:
"Good boys!
It was a sweet joy for me to see that she was thinking of Mattia, and that she was reuniting us in her heart.
Meanwhile, our cow continued to moo.
"She's asking to be milked," said Mattia.
Without listening further I ran home to fetch the well-scrubbed tin bucket in which Roussette used to be milked and which I had seen hanging in its usual place, even though Mother Barberin hadn't had a cow in the stable for a long time. On my way back I filled it with water so that we could wash our cow's udder, which was full of dust.
What satisfaction Mother Barberin felt when she saw her bucket three-quarters full of lovely frothy milk!
"I think she'll give more milk than La Roussette," she said.
The cow was milked and let out into the yard to graze, and we returned to the house where, on the way to fetch the bucket, I had prepared our butter and flour on the table.
When Mother Barberin saw this new surprise, she started exclaiming again, but I thought it only fair to interrupt:
This one," I said, "is at least as much for us as it is for you; we're starving and we want to eat pancakes. Do you remember how we were interrupted the last mardi-gras I spent here, and how the butter you borrowed to make me pancakes was used to fry onions in the frying pan? this time we won't be disturbed.
- So you know that Barberin is in Paris! asked Mère Barberin.
- asked Mother Barberin.
- And do you also know what he did in Paris?
- No, I don't know.
- It's of interest to you.
- For me?" I said, frightened.
But before answering, Mother Barberin looked at Mattia as if she didn't dare speak in front of him.
Oh, you can speak in front of Mattia," I said, "I explained to you that he was like a brother to me, and that everything that interests me interests him too.
- But that's rather long to explain," she said.
I saw that she was reluctant to talk, and, not wanting to press her in front of Mattia for fear that she would refuse, which I thought would upset him, I decided to wait and find out what Barberin had been doing in Paris.
When Mattia had gone out, I asked Mother Barberin a few questions.
"Now that we are alone, will you tell me why Barberin's trip to Paris is of interest to me?
- Of course, my child, and with pleasure.
With pleasure! I was stunned.
Before continuing, Mother Barberin looked towards the door.
Reassured, she came back to me and said half aloud, with a smile on her face:
"It seems that your family is looking for you!
- My family!
- Yes, your family, my Rémi.
- Do I have a family? I've got a family, Mum Barberin, I'm an abandoned child!
- You'd better believe they didn't abandon you voluntarily, because now they're looking for you.
- Who's looking for me? Oh, Mother Barberin, speak, speak quickly, I beg you!
Then suddenly it seemed to me that I was mad, and I cried out:
"But no, that's impossible, it's Barberin who's looking for me.
- Yes, of course, but for your family.
- No, for him, to take me back, to sell me; but he won't take me back.
- Oh, my Rémi, how can you think I would lend myself to that?
- He wants to deceive you, Mother Barberin.
- Come on, my child, be reasonable, listen to what I have to say and don't scare yourself like that.
- I remember.
- Listen to what I heard myself: you'll believe that, won't you? Next Monday, a month ago, I was working in the bakehouse, when a man, or rather a gentleman, came into the house, where Barberin was at the time. Is your name Barberin?" said the gentleman, who spoke with the accent of someone who was not from our country. -- Yes," replied Jérôme, "that's me. -- It was you who found a child in Paris, on the Avenue de Breteuil, and took on the task of bringing him up? -- Yes, I did. -- Where is this child now, please? -- What do you care, please?" replied Jérôme.
If I had doubted Mother Barberin's sincerity, I would have known from the kindness of her reply that she was telling me what she had heard.
You know," she continued, "that from inside the bakery you can hear what's being said here, and then there was talk of you, which made me want to listen. So, as if to hear better, I came closer and stepped on a branch that broke. So we're not alone?" said the man. -- It's my wife," replied Jérôme. -- It's very hot in here," said the gentleman; "if you like, we could go out and have a chat. They both left and it was only three or four hours later that Jérôme returned alone. You can imagine how curious I was to know what had been said between Jérôme and this gentleman who was perhaps your father; but Jérôme didn't answer anything I asked him. But Jérôme didn't answer anything I asked him. He just told me that the gentleman wasn't your father, but that he was looking for you on behalf of your family.
- And where is my family? What family is that? Do I have a father? A mother?
- That's what I asked Jérôme, like you. He told me he didn't know. Then he added that he was going to leave for Paris to find the musician to whom he had rented you, and who had given him his address in Paris, rue de Lourcine, with another musician called Garofoli. I have remembered all the names, remember them yourself.
- I know them, don't worry; and Barberin hasn't said anything to you since he left?
- No, he's probably still looking; the gentleman gave him a hundred francs in five gold louis, and since then he's probably given him more money. All this, and also the beautiful swaddling clothes you were wrapped in when you were found, is proof that your parents are rich; when I saw you there by the fireplace, I thought you had found them, and that's why I thought your friend was your real brother."
Just then, Mattia came to the door, and I called out to him:
"Mattia, my parents are looking for me, I have a family, a real family".
But, strangely enough, Mattia didn't seem to share my joy and enthusiasm.
So I told him what Mother Barberin had just told me.
X -- The old and new families
I slept little that night; and yet how often, in recent times, had I made a point of sleeping in my childhood bed where I had spent so many good nights in the past, without waking up, huddled in my corner with the covers pulled up to my chin! How many times, too, when I had been obliged to sleep under the stars (the stars are not beautiful in all weathers, alas!), how many times, chilled by the cold of the night, or pierced to the bone by the morning dew, had I regretted that good blanket!
As soon as I lay down I fell asleep, for I was tired from my day and also from the night spent in prison; but I soon woke up with a start, and then it was impossible for me to get back to sleep; I was too agitated, too feverish.
My family were looking for me, but to find them I had to go to Barberin.
This thought alone was enough to dampen my joy; I would have liked Barberin to have had nothing to do with my happiness. I had not forgotten his words to Vitalis when he had sold me to him, and I had often repeated them to myself: "There will be profit for those who have brought up this child; if I had not counted on that, I would never have taken him on. From that time on, this had fuelled my bad feelings towards Barberin.
It would be up to me later, when I was rich, to make clear the difference I was making in my heart between wife and husband; it would be up to me to thank and reward Mother Barberin.
For the moment all I had to do was look after Barberin, that is to say, I had to seek him out and find him, for he was not one of those husbands who do not take a step without telling their wives where they are going and where they can be contacted if they are needed. All Mother Barberin knew was that her man was in Paris; since his departure he had not written, nor had he sent any news from a compatriot or a returning bricklayer; such friendly attentions were not in his nature.
She didn't know exactly where he was, or where he was staying, so that she could send him a letter; but all she had to do was look for him at two or three landlords in the Mouffetard district whose names she knew, and he would certainly be found at one or other of them.
So I had to leave for Paris and look myself for the one who was looking for me.
It was undoubtedly a great and unexpected joy for me to have a family; however, this joy, in the conditions in which it came to me, was not unmixed.
I had hoped that we would be able to spend several quiet, happy days with Mother Barberin, playing my old games with Mattia, and the very next day we had to set off again.
Here we were again, on the open road, with our rucksacks on our backs and Capi in front of us; we walked at a brisk pace, or, more precisely, from time to time, without really knowing what I was doing, pushed unwittingly by my haste to get to Paris, I lengthened my stride.
But Mattia, after following me for a while, tells me that if we go on like this we'll soon run out of strength, so I slow down my pace and soon pick it up again.
If we had not been obliged to earn our daily bread, I would, in spite of Mattia, have kept up the pace; but we had to play in the big villages on our way, and, until my rich parents had shared their wealth with us, we had to make do with the small pennies that we picked up with difficulty here and there, at random.
So it took us longer than I would have liked to get from Creuse to Nièvre, in other words from Chavanon to Dreuzy, via Aubusson, Montluçon, Moulins and Decize.
Besides the daily bread, there was another reason why we had to make as much money as possible. I hadn't forgotten what Mother Barberin had said to me when she assured me that with all my wealth I could never make her happier than I had with my poverty, and I wanted my little Lise to be as happy as Mother Barberin had been. Of course I would share my wealth with Lise, there was no doubt about that, at least for me; but, in the meantime, but before I was rich, I wanted to give Lise a present bought with the money I had earned, -- the gift of poverty.
We bought a doll and a household in Decize, which fortunately cost less than a cow.
From Decize to Dreuzy, all we had to do was hurry, which we did, because, with the exception of Châtillon-en-Bazois, we only found poor villages on our route, where the peasants were not prepared to take from their necessities to be generous with musicians they didn't care about.
From Châtillon we followed the banks of the canal, and these wooded banks, this calm water, these barges which went gently dragged by horses, brought me back to the happy time when, on The Swan, with Mrs Milligan and Arthur, I had sailed on a canal in this way. Where was The Swan now? How many times, when we had crossed or sailed along a canal, had I asked if we had seen a pleasure boat which, with its veranda and its luxurious fittings, could not be mistaken for any other! No doubt Mrs Milligan had returned to England with her recovered Arthur. And yet, more than once, as I walked along the banks of the Nivernais canal, I wondered, when I saw a horse-drawn boat in the distance, if it wasn't The Swan coming towards us.
As it was autumn, our walking days were shorter than in summer, and we made arrangements to arrive as far as possible in the villages where we were to sleep before nightfall. However, although we pushed on, especially at the end of our stage, we didn't reach Dreuzy until it was pitch dark.
To get to Lise's aunt's house, we only had to follow the canal, since Aunt Catherine's husband, who was a lock-keeper, lived in a house built right next to the lock he looked after; this saved us time, and we soon found the house, situated at the end of the village, in a meadow planted with tall trees that from a distance seemed to float in the fog.
My heart was beating fast as we approached the house, whose window was lit by the reverberation of a large fire burning in the chimney, throwing up sheets of red light from time to time, which illuminated our path.
When we got very close to the house, I saw that the door and window were closed; but through the window, which had no shutters or curtains, I could see Lise at table next to her aunt, while a man, probably her uncle, stood in front of her with his back to us.
We're having supper," said Mattia, "now's the time.
But I stopped him with one hand without speaking, while with the other I motioned to Capi to stay behind me silently.
Then, reaching over the strap of my harp, I prepared to play.
Ah, yes," said Mattia in a low voice, "a serenade, that's a good idea.
- No, not you, just me".
And I played the first notes of my Neapolitan song, but without singing, so that my voice wouldn't betray me.
As I played, I looked at Lise; she looked up sharply and I saw her eyes flash like lightning.
I sang.
Then she jumped out of her chair and ran to the door; I only had time to give my harp to Mattia, and Lise was in my arms.
We were ushered into the house, and after Aunt Catherine had kissed me, she put two place settings on the table.
But then I asked her to set a third.
If you don't mind," I said, "we have a little friend with us.
And I took our doll out of my bag and sat it on the chair next to Lise's. Lise's gaze went from my head to hers.
I have never forgotten the look Lise gave me, and I can still see it.
XI -- Barberin
If I hadn't been in a hurry to get to Paris, I would have stayed a long, long time with Lise; we had so much to say to each other, and we could say so little with the language we used!
Lise had to tell me how she had settled in Dreuzy, how she had been taken in great friendship by her uncle and aunt, who, of the five children they had had, no longer had a single one, an all-too-common misfortune in the families of the Nièvre, where women abandon their own children to be nurses in Paris; -- how they treated her like their true daughter; how she lived in their house, what her occupations were, what her games and pleasures were: fishing, boat trips, races in the big woods, which took up almost all her time, since she couldn't go to school. 
My travels through France with Vitalis over several years and with Mattia in recent months had taken me through many countries; I had seen none so curious as the one we were in at the moment: immense woods, beautiful meadows, rocks, hills, caves, foaming waterfalls, quiet ponds, and in the narrow valley with steep hills on either side, the canal, which meandered along. It was superb; all you could hear was the murmur of the water, the birdsong and the wind whistling through the tall trees. It's true that, a few years earlier, I had also found the Bièvre valley pretty. So I wouldn't want anyone to take my word for it too easily. What I want to say is that wherever I went for a walk with Lise, wherever we played together, the country seemed to me to possess beauties and a charm that others, more favoured perhaps, did not have in my eyes. I saw this country with Lise, and it remained in my memory illuminated by my joy.
However, in spite of everything, we had to leave Lise and this country to set off again. But for me it was without too much sorrow; I had so often cherished my dreams of wealth that I had come to believe, not that I would be rich one day, but that I was already rich, and that I only had to form a wish to be able to realise it in the near future, very near, almost immediate.
Leaving Corbeil, we retraced the route we had taken six months earlier when we left Paris to go to Chavanon, and, before arriving in Villejuif, we entered the farmhouse where we had given the first concert of our association by having a wedding dance. The groom and the bride recognised us, and they wanted us to make them dance again. We were given supper and bed.
It was from there that we left the next morning to return to Paris; it had been just six months and fourteen days since we had left.
The weather was grey and cold; there was no more sun in the sky, no more flowers, no more greenery on the sides of the road. The summer sun had done its work, and then came the first fogs of autumn; it was no longer wallflowers that fell on our heads from the top of the walls, it was dried leaves that detached themselves from the yellowing trees.
As far as Mattia was concerned, the closer we got to Paris, the more melancholy he became, and he often walked for hours without saying a word to me. He had never told me the cause of this sadness, and I, imagining that it was due solely to his fears of separation, had not wanted to repeat what I had explained to him several times, that is to say that my parents could not have the thought of separating us.
It was only when we stopped for lunch before reaching the fortifications that, while eating his bread and sitting on a stone, he told me what was worrying him so much.
"Do you know who I'm thinking about as we enter Paris?
- Whom?
- Yes, who; it's Garofoli. If he'd been released from prison? When they told me he was in prison, I didn't think to ask for how long; so he could be free now and back in his flat in the rue de Lourcine. We should be looking for Barberin in rue Mouffetard, that is, in Garofoli's own neighbourhood, at his door. He's my master, he's my uncle, so he can take me back with him and I won't be able to escape. You were afraid of falling back into Barberin's hands; you know how afraid I am of falling back into Garofoli's. Oh, my poor head! And then the head would be nothing compared to the separation; we would no longer be able to see each other, and this separation by my family would be far more terrible than by yours. Garofoli would certainly like to take you with him and give you the instruction he offers his pupils with the accompaniment of a whip; but you wouldn't want to come, and I wouldn't want your company. You've never been beaten!
My mind carried away by my hope, I had not thought of Garofoli; but everything Mattia had just told me was possible, and I needed no explanation to understand the danger to which we were exposed.
What do you want?" I asked him, "do you want to stay out of Paris?
- I think that if I didn't go to Rue Mouffetard, it would be enough to avoid the bad luck of meeting Garofoli.
- Well, don't come to Rue Mouffetard, I'll go on my own, and we'll meet somewhere this evening at seven.
The place Mattia and I agreed to meet was the end of the Pont de l'Archevêché, on the side of the chevet de Notre-Dame; and, things thus arranged, we set off again to enter Paris.
When we reached the Place d'Italie we parted, both of us feeling as if we would never see each other again, and while Mattia and Capi went down towards the Jardin des Plantes, I headed for the Rue Mouffetard, which was only a short distance away.
It was the first time in six months that I had been alone without Mattia and Capi by my side, and in this great Paris it gave me a painful sensation.
But I shouldn't let this feeling get me down; wasn't I going to find Barberin, and through him my family?
I had written on a piece of paper the names and addresses of the landlords where I was to find Barberin; but this had been a superfluous precaution, I had forgotten neither these names nor these addresses, and I did not need to consult my paper: Pajot, Barrabaud and Chopinet.
It was Pajot that I met first on my way down the rue Mouffetard. I bravely entered a gargote that occupied the ground floor of a furnished house, but it was with a trembling voice that I asked for Barberin.
"We don't have that! Don't know it!
I thanked him and went a little further on to Barrabaud's; he was a garni landlord as well as a fruit grower.
I asked my question again.
"Ah yes, Barberin... We had that back in the day; at least four years ago.
- Five," said the woman, "even though he owes us a week.
That was just what I was asking. I left disappointed and to some extent worried. All I had left was Chopin, and who could I turn to if he didn't know anything?
Like Pajot, Chopinet was a restaurateur, and when I entered the room where he cooked and served meals, several people were seated.
Barberin", he replied, "he's no longer here.
- And where is he?" I asked, trembling.
- He didn't leave his address.
My face no doubt betrayed my disappointment in an eloquent and touching way, for one of the men eating at a table near the stove called out to me.
"What do you want with Barberin?" he asked me.
It was impossible for me to give a straight answer and tell my story.
"I've come from the country, his country, Chavanon, to give him news of his wife; she told me I'd find him here.
- If you know where Barberin is," said the headwaiter, addressing the man who had questioned me, "you can tell that boy, who means him no harm, of course, can't you, boy?
- Oh, no, sir!
Hope returned to me.
"Barberin must now be staying at the Hôtel du Cantal, Passage d'Austerlitz; he was there three weeks ago.
I thanked him and left, but before going to the Passage d'Austerlitz, which I thought was at the end of the Pont d'Austerlitz, I wanted to find out some news about Garofoli so that I could take it to Mattia.
I was very close to the rue de Lourcine; I only had to walk a few steps to find the house where I had come with Vitalis. As on the day we had first met there, an old man, the same old man, was hanging rags against the greenish wall of the courtyard; it was as if he had done nothing else since I had seen him.
"Is Mr Garofoli back?" I asked.
The old man looked at me and coughed without answering; it seemed to me that I had to make it clear that I knew where Garofoli was, otherwise I would get nothing from this old ragpicker.
Do you know when he'll be back?" I said when the coughing had subsided.
- Three months.
With Garofoli in prison for another three months, Mattia could breathe a sigh of relief, for within three months my parents would have found a way to make it impossible for the terrible padrone to do anything against his nephew.
If I had had a moment of cruel emotion at Chopinet's, hope had now returned to me; I was going to find Barberin at the Hôtel du Cantal.
Without further ado I made my way towards the Passage d'Austerlitz, full of hope and joy and, no doubt as a result of these feelings, quite disposed to indulge Barberin.
Crossing the Jardin des Plantes, it's not long from the Rue de Lourcine to the Passage d'Austerlitz; I soon arrived in front of the Hôtel du Cantal, which was a hotel in name only, being in reality a miserable garret. It was run by a shaky-headed, half-deaf old woman.
When I had asked her my usual question, she put her hand behind her ear and asked me to repeat what I had just asked her.
My hearing is a bit hard," she said in a low voice.
- I'd like to see Barberin, Barberin de Chavanon; he's staying with you, isn't he?
Without answering, she raised both her arms in the air with such a sudden movement that her cat, asleep on top of her, jumped to the ground in fright.
"Alas, alas," she said.
Then she looked at me with a stronger shake of her head:
Are you the boy?" she asked.
- What boy?
- The one he was looking for.
That he was looking for! Hearing that word made my heart clench.
Barberin!" I cried.
- Deceased, it's deceased Barberin you should say.
I leaned on my harp.
So he's dead?" I said, shouting loud enough to be heard, but in a voice that was hoarse with emotion.
- Eight days ago, at Saint-Antoine hospital.
I was devastated; Barberin was dead! and how could I find my family now? where could I look for them?
So you're the boy," continued the old woman, "the one he was looking for to give back to his rich family?
Hope returned to me, and I clung to her words:
"Please, madam, tell me what you know.
- But I don't know anything other than what I've just told you, my boy, I mean my young gentleman.
- What Barberin told you about my family? You can see my emotion, Madame, my confusion, my anguish.
Without answering, she raised her arms to the sky again:
"What a story!
At that moment a woman who looked like a servant entered the room where we were; then the mistress of the Hotel du Cantal, abandoning me, said to this woman:
"Now there's a story! This young man you see is the one Barberin was talking about; he arrives, and Barberin is no longer there, so there's a story!
- So Barberin never told you about my family?
- More than twenty times, more than a hundred times, a rich family.
- Where does this family live, what's their name?
- Barberin never spoke to me about that. You see, he kept it a secret; he wanted the reward to be for himself, as it should be, and he was a clever fellow.
Alas! yes, I understood; I understood only too well what the old woman had just told me: Barberin, in dying, had taken the secret of my birth with him.
I had come so close to my goal only to miss it. Ah! my beautiful dreams! my hopes!
"And you don't know anyone to whom Barberin would have told more than you?
- Barberin wasn't such a fool to confide in anyone; he was far too suspicious for that.
- And you've never seen anyone from my family come to see him?
- I never did.
- Any friends of his whom he told about my family?
- He didn't have any friends."
I grabbed my head with both hands, but no matter how hard I looked, I couldn't find anything to guide me; besides, I was so moved, so confused, that I couldn't follow my thoughts.
He received a letter once," said the old woman after thinking for a long time, "a loaded letter.
- Where did it come from?
- I don't know; the postman gave it to him himself, but I didn't see the stamp.
- Surely this letter can be traced?
- When he died, we looked through what he'd left here. Ah, it wasn't out of curiosity of course, but just to warn his wife; we didn't find anything; at the hospital either, we didn't find any papers in his clothes, and if he hadn't said he was from Chavanon, we wouldn't have been able to warn his wife.
- So Mother Barberin has been informed?
- Pardi!"
I was speechless for quite a long time. What could I say? What could I ask? These people had told me what they knew. They knew nothing. And of course they had done everything they could to find out what Barberin had tried to hide from them.
I thanked them and headed for the door.
Where are you off to?" asked the old woman.
- To meet my friend.
- Oh, you have a friend?
- Yes, I do.
- Does he live in Paris?
- We arrived in Paris this morning.
- Well, you know, if you don't have a hotel, you can stay here; you'll be fine, I can boast, and in an honest house. Take care that if your family is looking for you, tired of not having any news of Barberin, they will come here and not elsewhere; then you will be here to receive them; that's an advantage; where would they find you if you weren't here? How old is your friend?
- He's a bit younger than me.
- Just think! two young people on the pavement of Paris; you can make such bad acquaintances! There are hotels that are so badly frequented! It's not like here, where it's quiet; but that's what the neighbourhood wants.
I wasn't really convinced that the neighbourhood was conducive to tranquillity; in any case, the Hôtel du Cantal was one of the dirtiest and most miserable houses you could ever see, and in my life of travel and adventure I had seen some pretty miserable ones; but this old woman's proposal was worth considering. Besides, this was not the time to be difficult and I didn't have my family, my rich family, to go and stay with her in the beautiful hotels on the boulevard, or in her beautiful house, if she lived in Paris. At the Hôtel du Cantal our expenses wouldn't be too great, and now we had to think about expenses. Oh, how right Mattia had been to want to earn money on our journey from Dreuzy to Paris! What would we do if we didn't have seventeen francs in our pocket?
"How much will you rent us a room for my friend and me?
- Ten sous a day, is that too much?
- Well, my friend and I will come back tonight.
- Come home early, Paris is bad at night.
Before going home I had to join Mattia, and I still had several hours before the time fixed for our rendezvous. Not knowing what to do, I went sadly to the Jardin des Plantes to sit on a bench in a secluded corner. My legs were broken and my mind was lost.
My fall had been so sudden, so unexpected, so hard! So I would exhaust all the misfortunes one after the other, and every time I stretched out my hand to establish myself firmly in a good position, the branch I was hoping to grasp would break under my fingers and let me fall; -- and always like that! Wasn't it inevitable that Barberin should have died just when I needed him, and that, in a spirit of gain, he should have hidden from everyone the name and address of the person - my father, no doubt - who had given him the task of investigating to find me?
Night came and the gaslights were lit, so I headed for the church of Notre-Dame, whose two towers stood out in black against the purple sunset. At the head of the church I found a bench to sit on, which was nice, because my legs were broken, as if I'd been on a very long walk, and there I resumed my sad reflections. I had never felt so overwhelmed, so weary. In this great Paris full of light, noise and movement, I felt more lost than I would have been in the middle of fields or woods.
A little before seven o'clock I heard a cheerful bark; almost immediately in the shadows I saw a white body coming towards me. Before I could think, Capi had jumped onto my lap and was licking my hands with his tongue; I hugged him and kissed him on the nose.
Mattia soon appeared:
Well?" he shouted from a distance.
- Barberin is dead.
He began to run to get near me more quickly; in a few hurried words, I told him what I had done and what I had learned.
Then he showed a sorrow that was very sweet to my heart, and I felt that, although he feared everything from my family for himself, he no less sincerely wished, for my sake, that I would find my parents.
With kind and affectionate words he tried to console me and above all to convince me not to despair.
"If your parents have found Barberin, they'll be worried not to hear from him; they'll try to find out what's become of him and naturally they'll end up at the Hotel du Cantal: let's go to the Hotel du Cantal; it's a few days late, that's all.
That's what the old woman with the wobbly head had already told me, but when Mattia said it, it took on a whole new meaning for me. Obviously it was only a delay; how childish I had been to despair and despair! Then, feeling a little calmer, I told Mattia what I had learned about Garofoli.
"Another three months!" he cried.
And he began to dance a step in the middle of the street, singing.
Then, suddenly stopping and coming to me, he said:
"How different this one's family is from that one's! Now you're crying because you've lost yours, and I'm singing because mine is lost.
- If you'd lost your sister Cristina, would you be dancing?
- Oh, don't say that.
- You can see for yourself.
Through the quays we reached the Passage d'Austerlitz, and, as my eyes were no longer blinded by emotion, I could see how beautiful the Seine is in the evening, when it is lit by the full moon which here and there puts silver spangles on its dazzling waters like an immense moving mirror.
XII -- Research
The next morning I began my day by writing to Mother Barberin to tell her what I had learned, and this was no small task for me.
How could I tell her quite bluntly that her husband had died? She was fond of her Jérôme; they had lived together for many years, and she would be saddened if I did not share her grief.
Finally, as best I could, and with repeated assurances of affection, I got to the end of my paper. Of course, I told him about my disappointment and my present hopes. To tell the truth, it was mainly about that. If my family should write to her for news of Barberin, I asked her to let me know immediately, and above all to pass on to me the address they would give her by sending her to me in Paris, at the Hôtel du Cantal.
Having done this, I had another duty to fulfil towards Lise's father, and this too was difficult for me, at least in one respect. When, at Dreuzy, I had told Lise that my first trip to Paris would be to see her father in prison, I had explained to her that, if my parents were as rich as I had hoped, I would ask them to pay what the father owed, so that I would only go to the prison to get him out and take him with me. This was part of the programme of joys I had drawn up for myself: first father Acquin, then mother Barberin, then Lise, then Étiennette, then Alexis, then Benjamin. As for Mattia, we only did for him what we did for myself, and he was happy with what made me happy. What a disappointment to go to the prison empty-handed and see my father again, just as incapable of doing him a favour as when I had left him and paid my debt of gratitude!
I immediately told him about Lise and Alexis; then, as I wanted to explain why I hadn't been able to go to Étiennette's, he interrupted me:
"What about your parents?
- Do you know?
Then he told me that Barberin had visited him a fortnight before.
He's dead," I said.
- What a misfortune!
He explained how Barberin had come to him to find out what had become of me. On arriving in Paris, Barberin had gone to see Garofoli, but of course he had not found him; so he had gone to look for him far away, in the provinces, in the prison where Garofoli was locked up, and Garofoli had told him that after Vitalis's death I had been taken in by a gardener called Acquin. Barberin had returned to Paris, to the Glacière, and there he had learned that this gardener was being held in Clichy. He had come to the prison, and the father had told him how I was travelling around France, so that, although it was impossible to know exactly where I was at the moment, he was certain that at some time I would pass through the home of one of his children. So he had written to me himself at Dreuzy, Varses, Esnandes and Saint-Quentin; if I hadn't found his letter at Dreuzy, it was because I had probably already left there when it arrived.
I explained to him what our hopes were, and he confirmed them with all sorts of good reasons:
"Since your parents were able to discover Barberin at Chavanon, since Barberin was able to discover Garofoli and discover me here, we'll find you at the Hôtel du Cantal: so stay there!
My tongue itched to tell him that my parents would soon have him out of prison; but I thought in time that it was not appropriate to boast in advance of the joys that one proposed to make, and I contented myself with assuring him that soon he would be at liberty with all his children around him.
In the meantime," said Mattia when we were in the street, "my advice is that we shouldn't waste our time and that we should earn some money. Besides, we've got nothing better to do than sing and play our repertoire; let's wait until we have your carriage, it will be less tiring; in Paris I'm at home and I know the good places."
He knew them so well, the good places, public squares, private courtyards, cafés, that in the evening before going to bed we counted a receipt of fourteen francs.
Then, as I drifted off to sleep, I repeated to myself something I had often heard Vitalis say, that fortune only comes to those who don't need it. Surely such a good income was a sure sign that my parents would be arriving any minute.
Three days went by without anything new happening and without the woman at the hotel answering anything other than her eternal refrain to my questions, which were always the same: "No one has come to ask for Barberin, and I haven't received a letter for you or for Barberin"; but on the fourth day she finally handed me a letter.
It was Mother Barberin's reply, or more precisely the reply Mother Barberin had made me write, since she herself could neither read nor write.
She told me that she had been informed of her man's death, and that a short time before, she had received a letter from him which she was sending me, thinking it might be useful to me, since it contained information about my family.
Quick, quick," cried Mattia, "let's read Barberin's letter.
It was with trembling hands and a heavy heart that I opened the letter:
"My dear wife,
"I'm in hospital, so ill that I don't think I'll get up again. If I had the strength, I'd tell you how it happened to me, but that wouldn't do any good. So I'm going to tell you that, if I don't survive, you'll have to write to Greth and Galley, Greensquare, Lincoln's-Inn, in London. Tell them that only you can give them news of the child, and make sure that you are well paid for this news; this money must make you live happily in your old age. You can find out what has happened to Rémi by writing to a man called Acquin, a former gardener who is now in Clichy prison in Paris. Have the parish priest write all your letters, because in this matter you mustn't trust anyone. Don't do anything until you know I'm dead.
"I send you my last love.
"BARBERIN.
I had not read the last word of this letter when Mattia jumped to his feet.
"Forward to London!" he shouted.
I was so surprised by what I had just read that I looked at Mattia without really understanding what he was saying.
Since Barberin's letter says that English lawyers are responsible for finding you," he continued, "that means, doesn't it, that your parents are English?
- If I'm English, I'm from the same country as Arthur and Mrs Milligan.
- What do you mean, if you're English? But that's certain: if your parents were French, they wouldn't ask English lawyers to look for their lost child in France, would they? Since you are English, you must go to England. It's the best way to get closer to your parents.
- You haven't been to London?
- You know very well I haven't, but at the Gassot circus we had two clowns who were English; they often talked to me about London, and they also taught me a lot of English words so that we could talk together without Mother Gassot, who was as curious as an owl, hearing what we were saying. We jabbered a lot of English nonsense in her face without her getting angry! I'll take you to London.
In two minutes our bags were packed and we went downstairs ready to leave. After paying for the night, I headed for the street where Mattia and Capi were waiting for me.
That day we went without stopping as far as Moisselles, where we slept in a farmhouse, because it was important to save our money for the crossing, Mattia had said it wasn't expensive; but how cheap was cheap?
As we walked, Mattia taught me some English words, because I was very preoccupied by a question that prevented me from enjoying myself: would my parents understand French or Italian? How would they hear us if they only spoke English? How embarrassing that would be! What would I say to my brothers and sisters, if I had any? Wouldn't I remain a stranger in their eyes as long as I couldn't talk to them? When I had thought about my return to my father's house, and very often since I left Chavanon I had drawn this picture in my mind, I had never imagined that I could be so paralysed in my momentum. It would undoubtedly be a long time before I knew English, which seemed a difficult language to me.
It took us eight days to get from Paris to Boulogne, because we stopped for a while in the main towns along the way: Beauvais, Abbeville, Montreuil-sur-Mer, in order to give a few performances and build up our capital.
When we arrived in Boulogne we still had thirty-two francs in our purse, which was much more than we needed to pay for our passage.
I had often said to Mattia that there was nothing so pleasant as a boat trip: you glided gently over the water without being aware of the route you were taking; it was really charming, like a dream.
As I spoke, I thought of the Swan and our trip on the Canal du Midi, but the sea is not like a canal. No sooner had we left the jetty than the boat seemed to sink into the sea, then it rose again, sank deeper into the water, and so on four or five times in succession with great movements like those of a huge swing; Suddenly there was a sort of silence, and all that could be heard were the wheels hitting the water, sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other, depending on the inclination of the ship. 
"It's a nice slide," Mattia said to me.
When day broke, a pale, misty, sunless day, we were in sight of high white cliffs, and here and there we could see ships standing still without sails. Gradually the roll diminished, and our ship glided over the calm water almost as gently as on a canal. We were no longer at sea, and on either side, in the distance, we could see wooded banks, or more accurately, we could make them out through the morning mist: we had entered the Thames.
In the middle of the river stood a whole fleet of ships at anchor, with steamers and tugs running between them, unrolling long ribbons of black smoke behind them.
So many ships! So many sails! I had never imagined that a river could be populated, and if the Garonne had surprised me, the Thames amazed me. Several of these ships were in the process of setting sail, and in their masts you could see sailors running here and there on rope ladders which, from a distance, looked as fine as spider threads.
I stayed like that for a long time, my eyes wide open, thinking of nothing but watching and admiring.
Finally the ship slowed down, the engine stopped, cables were thrown ashore: we were in London, and we disembarked in the midst of people who looked at us but didn't speak to us.
"Now's the time to use your English, my little Mattia".
And Mattia, who doubts nothing, approaches a fat man with a red beard to ask him politely, hat in hand, for directions to Greensquare.
It seems to me that Mattia spends a long time explaining himself to his man, who makes him repeat the same words several times; but I don't want to appear to doubt my friend's knowledge.
At last he returned.
It's very easy," he says, "all we have to do is walk along the Thames; we'll follow the quays.
But there are no quays in London, or rather there weren't any in those days, the houses extended right into the river, so we were obliged to follow streets that seemed to run alongside the river.
We keep going, and from time to time Mattia asks how far we are from Lincoln's Inn: he tells me that we have to pass under a large gate that will block the street we are following. This seems strange to me, but I dare not tell him that I think he is mistaken.
However, he's not wrong, and at last we come to an archway spanning the street with two small side doors: this is Temple-Bar. Once again we asked for directions and were told to turn right.
Suddenly, just when we thought we were lost, we found ourselves in front of a small cemetery full of tombs, their stones black as if they had been painted with soot or shoe polish: this was Greensquare.
While Mattia questions a passing shadow, I stop to try and stop my heart from beating; I can't breathe and I'm shaking.
Then I follow Mattia and we stop in front of a brass plaque that reads Greth and Galley.
Mattia stepped forward to ring the bell, but I stopped his arm.
What's the matter?" he said, "you're so pale!
- Wait till I get my courage back.
He rang the bell and we went in.
It seemed to me that we were in an office and that two or three people were leaning over tables, writing by the light of several gas burners that were burning and singing.
Mattia is speaking to one of these people because, of course, I have asked him to do the talking. In what he says, the words family and boy, Barberin, recur several times; I understand that he is explaining that I am the boy that my family has asked Barberin to find. The name Barberin makes an impression; people look at us, and the man Mattia was talking to gets up to open a door for us.
We entered a room full of books and papers; a gentleman was seated in front of a desk, and another in a dress and wig, holding several blue bags in his hand, was talking to him.
In a few words, the man in front of us explains who we are, and then the two gentlemen* *look at us from head to toe.
"Which of you is the child raised by Barberin?" said the man sitting in front of the desk in French.
Hearing French, I feel reassured and take a step forward:
"Moi, monsieur.
- Where is Barberin?
- He's dead.
The two gentlemen looked at each other for a moment, then the one with the wig on went out carrying his bags.
"So how did you get here?" asked the gentleman who had started questioning me.
I kept my story as short as possible.
As I spoke, the gentleman took notes and looked at me in a way that bothered me; it must be said that his face was hard, with something deceitful in the smile.
The moment came for me to ask the question that had been bothering me from the start of our conversation.
"Sir, does my family live in England?
- Certainly they live in London, at least at the moment.
- So I'm going to see them?
- In a few moments you will be near them. I'll send for you..."
He rang.
"One more word, sir, please. Do I have a father?
I could hardly say the word.
"Not only a father, but a mother, brothers and sisters.
- Ah, sir!
But as the door opened, my outpouring was cut short: I could only look at Mattia, my eyes full of tears.
The gentleman spoke in English to the man entering, and I thought I understood that he was telling him to show us out.
I stood up.
Oh, I forgot," said the gentleman, "your name is Driscoll, your father's name.
In spite of his bad face, I think I would have jumped on his neck, if he had given me the time; but he showed us the door with his hand, and we went out.
XIII -- The Driscoll family
The clerk who was to take me to my parents' house was a shrivelled, parchment-washed, wrinkled old man in a shabby, shiny black suit and a white cravat. When we were outside, he rubbed his hands frantically, cracking the knuckles of his fingers and wrists, shook his legs as if he wanted to send his worn-out boots away and, raising his nose in the air, sucked in the fog sharply several times, with the bliss of a man who has been locked up.
"He thinks it smells good," Mattia told me in Italian.
The old man looked at us and, without speaking to us, said "psit, psit", as if he were talking to dogs, which meant that we had to follow at his heels and not lose him.
Here we are in a muddy street, in the middle of the fog; a shop is brilliantly illuminated, and the gas reflected by mirrors, gilding and faceted bottles, spreads out into the street, where it pierces the fog down to the stream: It is a tavern, or rather what the English call a gin palace, a palace in which juniper brandy is sold as well as brandies of all kinds, all of which have the same origin in grain or beet alcohol. 
"Psit! psit!" says our guide.
Where are we going? I'm starting to get worried, and Mattia looks at me from time to time, but doesn't question me.
It wasn't long before our guide stopped; he was obviously lost, but just then a man came towards us, dressed in a long blue frock coat and wearing a hat trimmed with patent leather; a black and white braid was around his wrist and a holster was hanging from his belt; he was a policeman.
A conversation ensued, and soon we were on our way again, preceded by the policeman; we passed through alleys, courtyards and winding streets; it seemed to me that here and there houses had collapsed.
Finally we stopped in a courtyard with a small pond in the middle.
"Red Lion Court", said the policeman.
These words, which I've heard pronounced several times before, mean "Red Lion Court", Mattia tells me.
Why are we stopping? We can't be in Bethnal-Green; is this the yard where my parents live? But then...
The policeman knocked on the door of a sort of plank shed, and our guide thanked him: "So we've arrived?
Mattia, who hadn't let go of my hand, shook it and I shook his.
We understood each other; the anguish that gripped my heart gripped his too.
I was so confused that I'm not sure how the door the policeman had knocked on was opened to us, but from the moment we entered a vast room lit by a lamp and a charcoal fire burning in a grate, my memories came flooding back.
In front of the fire, in a straw armchair in the shape of a saint's niche, stood an old man with a white beard and a black cap, motionless as a statue. Opposite each other, but separated by a table, sat a man and a woman; the man was about forty, dressed in a grey velvet suit, with an intelligent but hard face; The woman, younger by five or six years, had blond hair hanging down over a black and white checked shawl crossed around her chest; her eyes had no gaze, and indifference or apathy was stamped on her face, which must have been beautiful, as in her indolent gestures. In the room were four children, two boys and two girls, all blond, like their mother; the eldest boy looked to be eleven or twelve years old; the youngest girl was barely three years old, and she walked along the floor.
All eyes were on Mattia and me, even those of the immobile old man; only the little girl was paying attention to Capi.
"Which of you is Rémi?" asked the man in the grey velvet suit in French.
I took a step forward.
Me," I said.
- Then give your father a kiss, my boy.
When I had thought about this moment, I had imagined that I would feel an impulse that would push me into my father's arms; I did not find this impulse in myself. Nevertheless, I went forward and embraced my father.
Now," he said, "here's your grandfather, your mother, your brothers and your sisters.
She let me kiss her, but she didn't kiss me at all, she just said two or three words that I didn't understand.
Give your grandfather a handshake," said my father, "and take it easy; he's paralysed.
I also shook hands with my two brothers and my eldest sister; I wanted to take the little girl in my arms, but as she was busy flattering Capi, she pushed me away.
And that one," asked my father, pointing at Mattia, "who is he?
I explained the ties that bound me to Mattia, and I did so trying to put into my words a little of the friendship I felt, and also trying to explain the gratitude I owed him.
"But you must be curious to know how we didn't look for you for thirteen years, and how we suddenly had the idea of going to find Barberin.
- Oh yes, very curious, I assure you, very curious.
- So come over here by the fire and I'll tell you all about it.
When I came in I had put my harp against the wall; I unzipped my bag and took the place indicated to me.
You are our eldest son," said my father, "and you were born a year after I married your mother. When I married your mother, there was a young girl who thought I would take her as my wife, and this marriage inspired in her a fierce hatred for the one she considered her rival. It was to take her revenge that, on the day you turned six months old, she stole you and took you to France, to Paris, where she abandoned you in the street. We did all we could to find you, but we didn't go as far as Paris, because we couldn't imagine that you had been carried so far. We didn't find you, and we thought you were dead and lost forever, when three months ago this woman, suffering from a fatal illness, revealed the truth before she died. I left immediately for France, and went to the police commissioner in the district where you had been abandoned. There I was told that you had been adopted by a bricklayer from Creuse, the same one who had found you, and I immediately went to Chavanon. Barberin told me that he had hired you out to Vitalis, a travelling musician, and that you were travelling around France with him. As I could not stay in France and pursue Vitalis, I entrusted Barberin with this task and gave him money to come to Paris. At the same time I recommended that he inform the lawyers who look after my affairs, Messrs Greth and Galley, when he had found you. If I didn't give him my address here, it's because we only live in London in the winter; in the summer we travel all over England and Scotland in our trade as travelling merchants with our carriages and our family. This, my boy, is how you were found, and how, after thirteen years, you are taking your place in the family again. I understand that you are a little frightened, because you don't know us, and you can't hear what we say, just as you can't make yourself heard; but I hope that you will soon get used to it."
Yes, no doubt, I would get used to it quickly; wasn't that only natural, since I was in my family, and the people I was going to live with were my father and mother, my brothers and sisters?
The beautiful swaddling clothes had not been right. For Mother Barberin, for Lise, for Father Acquin, for those who had helped me, it was a misfortune. I couldn't do for them what I had dreamed of, because travelling salesmen, especially when they live in a shed, can't be very rich; but, for me, what did it matter after all? I had a family, and it was a child's dream to imagine that fortune would be my mother. It wasn't money I needed, it was affection.
While I listened to my father's story, having eyes and ears only for him, the table was set: plates with blue flowers, and in a metal dish a large piece of beef cooked in the oven with potatoes around it.
"Are you hungry, boys?" my father asked Mattia and me.
Mattia's answer was to show his white teeth.
"Well, let's sit down to eat," said my father.
But before sitting down, he pushed my grandfather's armchair over to the table. Then, taking his place with his back to the fire, he began to cut the roast beef and served us each a nice slice accompanied by potatoes.
Although I had not been brought up to be civil, or rather, to tell the truth, although I had not been brought up at all, I noticed that my brothers and my eldest sister usually ate with their fingers, which they dipped in the sauce and licked without my father or mother seeming to notice. As for my grandfather, he only paid attention to his plate, and the only hand he could use kept going from the plate to his mouth; when he let a morsel slip from his trembling fingers, my brothers laughed at him.
When supper was over, I thought we were going to spend the evening in front of the fire; but my father told me that he was expecting friends, and that we should go to bed; then, taking a candle, he led us into a shed which adjoined the room where we had eaten; there were two of those large carriages which are usually used by travelling merchants. He opened the door of one of them, and we saw that it contained two bunk beds.
These are your beds," he said; "sleep well.
Such was my reception into my family, the Driscoll family.
XIV -- Father and mother to honour
My father, on retiring, had left us the candle; but he had locked the door of our carriage outside. We therefore had only to go to bed, which we did as quickly as possible, without chatting as we were wont to do every evening, and without telling each other our impressions of this busy day.
Good evening, Rémi," said Mattia.
- Good evening, Mattia.
Mattia didn't feel like talking any more than I felt like talking, and I was glad of his silence.
But not wanting to talk was not the same as wanting to sleep; when the candle went out, it was impossible for me to close my eyes, and I began to think about everything that had just happened, tossing and turning in my narrow bunk.
Sleep did not come, and the passage of time increased the vague fear that oppressed me. At first I couldn't quite work out which of the many impressions that clashed in my head in a tumultuous confusion was dominating me, but now I could see that it was fear. Fear of what? I didn't know, but I was afraid. And it wasn't that I was lying in this car, in the middle of this miserable district of Bethnal-Green, that frightened me. How many nights in my wandering life had I spent unprotected as I was now! I was aware that I was safe from all danger, and yet I was terrified; the more I stiffened against this fear, the less I was able to reassure myself.
The hours passed without me being able to see how far into the night it was, for there were no clocks in the vicinity that chimed. Suddenly I heard a fairly loud noise at the shed door, which opened onto a street other than the Red Lion courtyard; then, after several calls at regular intervals, a light entered our carriage.
Surprised, I looked round quickly, while Capi, who was asleep against my bunk, woke up to scold; I then saw that the light was coming in through a small window in the wall of our carriage, against which our beds were leaning, and which I had not noticed when I lay down because it was covered on the inside by a curtain; half of this window was in Mattia's bed, the other half in mine. I didn't want Capi to wake the whole house, so I put a hand on his mouth and looked out.
My father had gone into the shed and opened the door to the street quickly and quietly; then he had closed it again in the same way after two men had come in, heavily laden with bundles on their shoulders.
Then he put a finger to his lips and, with his other hand holding a muted lantern with shutters, pointed to the carriage in which we were lying; this meant that we should not make any noise, lest we wake up.
This attention touched me, and I had the idea of shouting to him that he need not have bothered about me, as I was not asleep; but, as that would have meant waking Mattia, who was no doubt sleeping peacefully, I kept quiet.
My father helped the two men unload their bundles, then disappeared for a while and soon returned with my mother. While he was gone, the men had opened their bundles; one was full of pieces of cloth; in the other were knitted items, knitwear, pants, stockings and gloves.
Then I realised what had surprised me at first: these people were merchants who had come to sell their wares to my parents.
My father took each item, examined it by the light of his lantern and passed it on to my mother, who cut off the labels with small scissors and put them in her pocket.
This struck me as odd, just as the time chosen for the sale struck me as odd.
While my father was examining the bales, he spoke in a low voice to the men who had brought them. If I had known English, I might have heard them, but you can't hear what you don't understand, and it was only the words bob and policemen, repeated several times, that struck my ear.
When the contents of the bales had been carefully inspected, my parents and the two men came out of the shed and into the house, and again darkness fell around us; it was obvious that they were going to settle their account.
I wanted to tell myself that there was nothing more natural than what I had just seen, but I couldn't convince myself, no matter how hard I tried. Why hadn't these people come to my parents' house through the courtyard of the Red Lion? Why had they spoken about the police in a low voice, as if they were afraid of being heard from outside? Why had my mother cut off the labels that hung on the items she bought?
These were not questions to put me to sleep, and as I couldn't find an answer to them, I tried to put them out of my mind, but to no avail. After a while I saw the light fill our carriage again, and again I looked through the slit in my curtain; but this time it was in spite of myself and against my will, whereas the first time it had been quite naturally to see and know. Now I told myself I shouldn't be looking, and yet I did. I told myself that it would probably be better not to know, and yet I wanted to see.
My father and mother were alone. While my mother quickly packed two bundles of the things she had brought with her, my father swept a corner of the shed. He raised it, then, as my mother had finished tying up the two bundles, he lowered them through the trapdoor into a cellar, the depth of which I could not see, while my mother lit it with the lantern. Once the two bales were down, he went back up, closed the trapdoor and, using his broom, put the sand he had removed back on top. When he had finished his work, it was impossible to see where the trapdoor opening was; on the sand they had both sown sprigs of straw, as there were everywhere on the floor of the shed.
They went out.
As they gently closed the door to the house, it seemed to me that Mattia was stirring in his bunk, as if resting his head on the pillow.
Had he seen what had just happened?
I didn't dare ask him. It was no longer a vague fear that suffocated me; I now knew why I was afraid: from head to foot I was bathed in a cold sweat.
Only then did I fall asleep, but a heavy, feverish sleep, full of anxious nightmares that suffocated me.
I was awakened by the sound of a lock, and the door of our carriage was opened; but, imagining that it was my father who had come to warn us that it was time to get up, I closed my eyes so as not to see him.
It's your brother," said Mattia, "who's giving us our freedom; he's already gone.
Mattia did not ask me if I had slept well, nor did I ask him any questions. At one point he looked at me and I looked away.
We had to go into the kitchen, but my father and mother weren't there; my grandfather was sitting in front of the fire in his armchair, as if he hadn't moved since the day before, and my elder sister, Annie, was wiping the table, while my elder brother, Allen, was sweeping the room.
I went over to them to give them my hand, but they continued their work without answering me.
Then I came to my grandfather, but he would not let me come near him, and, as the day before, he spat at me, which stopped me short.
"Ask Mattia what time I shall see my father and mother this morning," I said.
Mattia did as I said, and my grandfather, hearing him speak English, softened; his face lost some of its frightening fixity, and he was willing to answer.
"What did he say?
- That your father's out for the day, that your mother's asleep and that we can go for a walk.
- Is that all he said?" I asked, finding the translation very short.
Mattia looked embarrassed.
I don't know if I understood the rest," he said.
- Say what you understood.
- It seems to me that he said that, if we found a good opportunity in town, we shouldn't miss it, and then he added, I'm sure he did: 'Learn my lesson; you have to live at the expense of fools.
My grandfather undoubtedly guessed what Mattia was explaining to me, for at these last words he made the gesture of putting something in his pocket with his hand, which was not paralysed, and at the same time he winked.
"Let's go out," I said to Mattia.
For quite a long time we walked side by side, holding hands, saying nothing and going straight ahead without knowing where we were going.
Where do you want to go like that?" asked Mattia with some trepidation.
- I don't know, somewhere we can talk. I have to talk to you, and here, in this crowd, I couldn't."
In fact, in my wandering life, through fields and woods, I had become accustomed, at Vitalis' school, never to say anything important when we were in the middle of a town or village street, and when I was disturbed by passers-by, I immediately lost my ideas. I wanted to talk to Mattia seriously, knowing exactly what I was going to say.
Just as Mattia was asking me this question, we came to a street wider than the lanes we had just come from, and it seemed to me that I could see trees at the end of it. Perhaps it was the countryside; we headed that way. It wasn't the countryside, but it was an immense park with vast green lawns and clumps of young trees here and there. It was the perfect place for a chat.
Mattia," I said, "we have to leave, we have to go back to France.
- Never leave you!
- Why not?
- Because..."
He didn't finish and looked away from my questioning gaze.
"Mattia, answer me in all sincerity, frankly, without sparing me, without fear; didn't you sleep last night? did you see?"
He held his eyes down, and in a muffled voice:
I wasn't asleep," he said.
- What did you see?
- I saw everything.
- And did you understand?
-- That the people who were selling these goods hadn't bought them. Your father scolded them for knocking on the shed door instead of the house door; they replied that they were being watched by the bob, that is to say the policemen.
- So you can see that you have to leave," I said.
- If I have to go, you have to go too, it's no more useful for either of us. If you're afraid for me, I'm afraid for you, and that's why I say to you: "Let's leave together, let's go back to France to see Mother Barberin, Lise and your friends.
- But that's impossible! My parents are nothing to you, you owe them nothing; they are my parents, I must stay with them.
- Your parents! That old paralysed man, your grandfather! That woman lying on the table, your mother!
I rose to my feet, and in a tone of command, not of prayer, I cried out:
"Shut up, Mattia, don't talk like that, I forbid you! It's my grandfather and my mother you're talking about; I must honour and love them.
- You should if they were really your parents; but if they are not your grandfather, your father or your mother, must you still honour and love them?
- Didn't you listen to my father's story?
- What does this story prove? They lost a child the same age as you; they sent for him and found one the same age as the one they'd lost. That's all there is to it.
- You forget that the child stolen from them was abandoned on the Avenue de Breteuil, and that it was on the Avenue de Breteuil that I was found on the same day that theirs was lost.
- Why shouldn't two children have been abandoned on Avenue de Breteuil on the same day? Why wouldn't the police commissioner have made a mistake in sending Mr Driscoll to Chavanon? That is possible.
- It is absurd.
- Perhaps so; what I say, what I explain may be absurd; but that is because I say it and explain it badly, because I have a poor head; someone else would explain it better, and it would become reasonable; it is I who am absurd, that is all.
- Alas! no, that's not all.
- You have to remember that you don't look like your father or your mother, and that you don't have blond hair like your brothers and sisters, who are all, you understand, all, the same blond; why shouldn't you be like them? On the other hand, there's something quite astonishing: how did people who aren't rich spend so much money to find a child? For all these reasons, in my opinion, you're not a Driscoll; I know I'm just a beast, I've always been told, it's my head's fault. But you're not a Driscoll, and you mustn't stay with the Driscolls. If you want to stay, in spite of everything, I'll stay with you; but you'll want to write to Mother Barberin and ask her to tell us exactly what your nappies were like; when we get her letter, you'll ask the man you call your father, and then maybe we'll start to see a bit more clearly. Until then I'm staying put, and in spite of everything I'm staying with you; if we have to work, we'll work together."
XV -- Capi perverti
It was only at dusk that we returned to the Cour du Lion-Rouge; we spent the whole day walking in this beautiful park, chatting, after having breakfasted on a piece of bread that we bought.
My father had returned home and my mother was up. Neither he nor she commented on our long walk; it was only after supper that my father told us that he had to talk to both Mattia and me, and to do so he called us to the fireplace, which earned us a growl from grandfather, who was decidedly fierce about keeping his share of the fire.
"Tell me a little about how you earned your living in France," my father asked.
I did as he asked.
You are very talented!" asked my father; "show me what you can do.
I picked up my harp and played a tune, but it wasn't my Neapolitan song.
Good, good," said my father; "and Mattia, what does he know?
Mattia also played a piece on the violin and another on the cornet. It was the latter that drew a round of applause from the children, who were standing in a circle around us.
And Capi?" asked my father, "what does he play? I don't think it's just for your pleasure that you drag a dog around with you; he has to be able to earn his own food at least.
I was proud of Capi's talents, not only for himself but also for Vitalis; I wanted him to play some of the tricks in his repertoire, and he had his usual success with the children.
"But that dog is a fortune," said my father.
I replied to this compliment by praising Capi and assuring them that he was capable of learning in a short time anything that was shown to him, even what dogs didn't usually know how to do.
Since this is the case," continued my father, "here's what I propose. We are not rich, and we all work for a living; in the summer we travel all over England, and the children go to offer my goods to those who do not want to bother to come to us; but in the winter we have little to do. As long as we are in London, Rémi and Mattia can go and play music in the streets, and I have no doubt that they will soon earn some good money, especially when we get close to Christmas. But, as we mustn't be wasteful in this world, Capi will go and give performances with Allen and Ned.
- Capi only works well with me," I said briskly, for I couldn't bear to part with him.
"He'll learn to work with Allen and Ned, don't worry, and by dividing you in this way you'll earn a lot more.
- But I assure you that he won't do any good, and besides, Mattia and I won't earn as much as we would with Capi.
- When I've said a thing, I expect it to be done, and done right away; that's the rule of the house; I expect you to abide by it, like everyone else.
There was no need to reply, and I said nothing, but I thought to myself that my beautiful dreams for Capi were coming true as sadly as they had for me. How sad for him and for me!
The next day, Capi had to be taught a lesson; I took him in my arms, and gently, kissing him often on the nose, I explained to him what I expected of him; poor dog, how he looked at me, how he listened to me!
When I put his lead back in Allen's hand, I repeated my explanations, and he was so intelligent, so docile, that he followed my two brothers with a sad look on his face, but finally without resistance.
For Mattia and me, my father wanted to take us himself to a district where we stood a chance of making good money, and we crossed the whole of London to arrive in a part of the city where there were only beautiful houses with porticoes, in monumental streets lined with gardens. In these splendid streets with wide pavements, there were no more ragged, starving-looking poor people, but beautiful ladies in gaudy gowns, carriages whose panels shone like mirrors, magnificent horses driven by fat, greasy coachmen with powdered hair.
We didn't get back to the Red Lion Court until late, because it's a long way from the West End to Bethnal-Green, and I was delighted to see Capi again, well mauled but in good spirits.
I was so happy to see him again that after rubbing him well with dry straw, I wrapped him in my sheepskin and laid him in my bed.
Things went on like that for several days. We would leave in the morning and not return until the evening, having played our repertoire sometimes in one district and sometimes in another, while Capi went to give performances under the direction of Allen and Ned; but one evening my father told me that the next day I could take Capi with me, as he would be keeping Allen and Ned at home.
Unfortunately for the success of our enterprise, the fog had not cleared for two days; the sky, or what takes the place of a sky in London, was a cloud of orange vapour, and in the streets floated a sort of greyish smoke which allowed the view to extend only a few paces. We would not be going out much, and from the windows behind which we were being listened to, we would hardly see Capi; this was an unfortunate condition for our takings: so Mattia reviled the fog, this cursed fog, without suspecting the service he was to render us all three a few moments later.
Moving quickly, keeping Capi on our heels with a word I said to him from time to time, which with him was better than the strongest chain, we had arrived in Holborn, which, as you know, is one of the busiest and most commercial streets in London. Suddenly I noticed that Capi was no longer following us. What had become of him? This was extraordinary. I stopped to wait for him, threw myself into the recess of an alley and whistled softly, because we couldn't see far. I was already anxious, fearing that he had been stolen from us, when he came galloping up, holding a pair of woollen stockings in his mouth and wagging his tail. Putting his front paws against me, he presented me with the stockings and told me to take them; he looked very proud, as if he had succeeded in one of his most difficult tricks, and came to ask for my approval. It was done in a few seconds, and I was stunned, when Mattia suddenly took the stockings in one hand and led me down the aisle with the other.
Let's walk fast," he said, "but without running.
It was only after several minutes that he explained why he had run away.
"Like you, I was wondering where that pair of stockings had come from, when I heard a man say, "Where is the thief? The thief was Capi, you understand; without the fog we would have been arrested as thieves."
I understood only too well; for a moment I was suffocated. They had made a thief out of Capi, the good, honest Capi!
Let's go home," I said to Mattia, "and keep Capi on a leash.
Mattia didn't say a word to me, and we walked quickly back to the Cour du Lion-Rouge. The father, mother and children were around the table folding cloth; I threw the pair of stockings on the table, which made Allen and Ned laugh.
Here's a pair of stockings," I said, "that Capi has just stolen, for Capi has been made a thief; I think it was all a game.
I trembled as I spoke, and yet I had never felt so resolute.
My father looked me in the face, and made an angry gesture as if to stun me; his eyes burned me, but I did not lower mine; little by little his contracted face relaxed.
You were right to think it was a game," he said, "so that it never happens again, Capi will only go out with you from now on.
XVI -- The beautiful nappies lied
My grandfather continued to spit angrily at me whenever I went near him; my father only cared for me to ask me every evening for an account of our takings; my mother was out of the world most of the time; Allen, Ned and Annie hated me; only Kate allowed herself to be stroked, and even then it was only because my pockets were full.
What a fall!
And so, in my grief, although at first I rejected Mattia's suppositions, I came to think that, if I really were the child of this family, they would have other feelings for me than those they were showing me so callously, when I had done nothing to deserve this indifference or this harshness.
When Mattia saw me under the influence of these sad thoughts, he guessed very well what was provoking them, and then he would say to me, as if he were talking to himself:
"I'm curious to see what Mother Barberin has to say to you.
In order to get this letter, which was to be addressed to me "poste restante", we changed our daily route, and instead of going to Holborn via West-Smith-Field, we went down to the post office. For quite a long time, we made this journey in vain, but in the end, the letter we had been waiting for so impatiently was delivered to us.
The Post Office is not a good place to read, so we made our way to an alley nearby, which gave me time to calm my nerves a little, and there, at last, I was able to open Mother Barberin's letter, the letter she had had written by the parish priest of Chavanon:
"My little Rémi,
"I am very surprised and very angry at what your letter tells me, because, according to what my poor Barberin had always told me, both after finding you on the Avenue de Breteuil and after talking to the person who was looking for you, I thought that your parents were in a good and even in a great position of fortune.
"This idea was confirmed by the way you were dressed when Barberin brought you to Chavanon, which clearly showed that the objects you were wearing belonged to the layette of a rich child. You ask me to explain to you how the swaddling clothes in which you were swaddled looked; I can do that easily, because I have kept all these objects in order to serve as evidence of your recognition on the day when you are claimed, which I think will certainly happen.
"But, first of all, I have to tell you that you didn't have swaddling clothes; if I've spoken to you about swaddling clothes, it's out of habit and because children in our country are swaddled. But you were not swaddled; on the contrary, you were dressed; and here are the things that were found on you: a lace bonnet, which is special only for its beauty and richness; a fine canvas bra with a little lace at the neck and arms; a flannel nappy; white woollen stockings; white knitted slippers with silk puffs; a long dress, also in white flannel, and finally a large hooded white cashmere pelisse, lined with silk and decorated with beautiful embroidery on top. 
"You did not have a cloth nappy from the same layette, because you had been changed at the police commissioner's, where the nappy had been replaced by an ordinary towel.
"Finally, it should be added that none of these items were marked; but the flannel nappy and the bra must have been, because the corners where the mark is usually placed had been cut off, which indicated that every precaution had been taken to confuse the search.
"That, my dear Rémi, is all I can tell you. If you think you need these objects, just write to me and I'll send them to you.
"Don't be sorry, my dear boy, that you can't give me all the beautiful presents you promised; your cow, bought with your daily bread, is worth all the presents in the world to me. I am pleased to tell you that she is still in good health; her milk is not diminishing, and thanks to her I am now at my ease; I can't see her without thinking of you and your little friend Mattia.
"You are so tender and affectionate, how could you not be happy in your family, with a father, mother, brothers and sisters who will love you as you deserve to be loved?
"Farewell, my dear child, I kiss you affectionately.
"Your foster mother, Ve Barberin.
The end of this letter gripped my heart. Poor Mother Barberin, how good she was to me! Because she loved me, she imagined that everyone should love me like she did.
She's a good woman," said Mattia, "she thought of me; but when she'd forgotten me, that wouldn't stop me thanking her for her letter; with such a complete description, Master Driscoll shouldn't be mistaken in enumerating the things you were wearing when you were robbed.
It was no easy matter to ask my father to tell me what I was wearing when I was stolen from him. If I had asked him this question quite naively, without any ulterior motive, nothing would have been simpler; but it wasn't like that, and it was precisely this ulterior motive that made me shy and hesitant.
Finally, one day when a freezing rain had brought us home earlier than usual, I summoned up my courage and put the conversation on the subject that was causing me such poignant anguish.
At the first word of my question, my father looked me in the face, searching me with his eyes, as was his wont when he was hurt by what I said to him; but I withstood his gaze more bravely than I had hoped when I had thought of this moment.
What served me best in finding you," he said, "was the description of the clothes you were wearing when you were stolen from us: a lace bonnet, a canvas bra trimmed with lace, a flannel nappy and dress, woollen stockings, knitted slippers, and a hooded embroidered white cashmere pelisse. I had very much counted on the mark on your linen, F.D., meaning Francis Driscoll, which is your name; but this mark had been cut off by the person who had stolen you and who, by this precaution, hoped to prevent you ever being discovered; I also had to produce your baptismal certificate, which I had taken from your parish, which was returned to me and which I must still have.
Saying this, and with a complacency that was quite extraordinary in him, he went and rummaged in a drawer, and soon brought out a large piece of paper marked with several stamps, which he gave to me.
I made a last effort.
If you like," I said, "Mattia will translate it for me.
- Gladly.
From this translation, which Mattia did as best he could, it emerged that I had been born on Thursday 2 August and that I was the son of Patrick Driscoll and Margaret Grange, his wife.
What more could you ask for?
Mattia was not satisfied, however, and in the evening, when we had retired to our car, he leaned into my ear again as if he had something secret to tell me.
"Do you want me to tell you something that I can't get out of my head? It's that you're not Master Driscoll's child, but Master Driscoll's stolen child.
- Why would the Driscoll family look for me if I wasn't their child? Why would they have given money to Barberin and Greth and Galley?
To this Mattia was obliged to reply that he could not answer.
I stood in front of these questions, overwhelmed by my powerlessness, and I told myself that I would be banging my head uselessly and forever, in the middle of the night, against a wall from which there was no escape.
And yet I had to sing, play dance tunes and laugh and make faces, when my heart was so deeply sad.
Sundays were my best days, because there's no music on the streets of London on Sundays, and then I could freely give myself over to my sadness, walking with Mattia and Capi.
How little I resembled the child I had been a few months earlier!
One of those Sundays, as I was getting ready to go out with Mattia, my father kept me at home, telling me that he would need me during the day, and he sent Mattia out for a walk on his own. My grandfather hadn't come downstairs; my mother had gone out with Kate and Annie and my brothers were out running about: so there was just me and my father left at home.
We had been alone for about an hour when there was a knock at the door. My father went to open the door and came in accompanied by a gentleman who did not resemble the friends he usually received: this one was really what we call a gentleman in England, that is to say a real gentleman, elegantly dressed and with a haughty appearance, but with something of a tired look about him. He was about fifty years old. What struck me most about him was his smile, which, with the movement of both lips, revealed all his white teeth, sharp as those of a young dog. It was quite characteristic, and looking at him one wondered whether it was really a smile that contracted his lips in this way, or whether it was not rather a desire to bite.
After a few minutes of conversation, he abandoned English for French, which he spoke with ease and almost no accent.
Are you well?" asked the gentleman.
- Yes, sir.
- Have you never been ill?
- I had a chest outbreak.
- And how did that happen?
- For sleeping one night in the snow in the terrible cold; my master, who was with me, froze to death; I got this flux of the chest.
- How long ago was that?
- Three years ago.
- And you haven't felt sick since?
- No."
Without saying anything to me, he resumed his conversation in English with my father, and after a few minutes they both went out, not through the street door, but through the shed door.
After a while, my father came back and told me that, as he had to go out, he would not be using me as he had intended, and that I was free to go for a walk if I felt like it.
As it was raining, I got into our car to get my sheepskin. What a surprise to find Mattia there! I was about to speak to him, but he put his hand over my mouth and said in a low voice:
He said: "Mr James Milligan, your friend Arthur's uncle.
"As I was bored walking alone in these sad streets on this sad Sunday, I went home to sleep and lay down on my bed, but I did not sleep. Your father, accompanied by a gentleman, came into the shed, and I overheard their conversation without listening to him: "Solid as a rock," said the gentleman; "ten others would have died, he's even got a chest flux!" So, thinking it was about you, I listened, but the conversation immediately changed subject. How's your nephew doing?" asked your father. -- Three months ago, all the doctors were condemning him; his dear mother saved him again with her care. Ah, Mrs Milligan is a good mother." You think if at that name I lent an ear. If your nephew is better," continued my father, "then all your precautions are useless? -- For the time being perhaps," replied the gentleman, "but I don't want to admit that Arthur lives, that would be a miracle, and miracles are no longer of this world; on the day of his death I must be safe from any return and the sole heir must be me, James Milligan. -- Rest assured," said your father, "that's how it will be, I promise you. -- I'm counting on you," said the gentleman. And he added a few words which I did not quite understand and which I can roughly translate, although they do not seem to make any sense: "At that moment we will see what we have to do with it. And he walked out."
My first thought on hearing this was to go home and ask my father for Mr Milligan's address, so as to get news of Arthur and his mother, but I realised almost immediately that this was madness. A man who was impatiently awaiting the death of his nephew was not the man to ask about his nephew. And then, on the other hand, wasn't it imprudent to warn Mr Milligan that he had been heard?
Arthur was alive. He was getting better. For the moment there was joy enough for me in this good news.
XVII -- Christmas Nights
We talked of nothing but Arthur, Mrs. Milligan, and Mr. James Milligan.
Where were Arthur and his mother? Where could we look for them, where could we find them?
Mr J. Milligan's visits had inspired an idea and suggested a plan whose success seemed assured: since Mr J. Milligan had been to the Red Lion Court once, it was almost certain that he would return a second, a third time: didn't he have business with my father? Then, when he left, Mattia, whom he did not know, would follow him; we would know where he lived; we would ask his servants, and perhaps this information would lead us to Arthur.
If we had had to wait for Mr James Milligan, going out from morning to night as we had done since our arrival in London, it would not have been very clever; but the time was approaching when, instead of going out to play in the streets during the day, we would go out at night, for it is in the middle of the night that the waits, or Christmas concerts, take place. Then, staying at home during the day, one of us would keep watch, and we'd probably manage to surprise Arthur's uncle.
All we had to do was wait, and we waited.
We were too young, too newcomers, to establish ourselves as masters, and we had to give way to those who knew how to assert their rights of ownership with arguments that we were not strong enough to resist.
In the same way, we were not strong enough to resist the bands of negro musicians who roamed the streets and whom the English called nigger-melodits. These false negroes, who dress grotesquely in cod-tailed clothes and huge collars in which their heads are wrapped like a bouquet in a sheet of paper, were our terror.
One day while we were watching them, I saw one of them, the most extravagant of them, make signs to Mattia; at first I thought it was to mock us and amuse the public with some grotesque scene of which we would be the victims, when, to my great surprise, Mattia replied in a friendly manner.
Do you know him?" I asked.
- It's Bob.
- Who's Bob?
- My friend Bob from the Gassot circus, one of the two clowns I told you about, and above all the one to whom I owe my knowledge of English.
- Didn't you recognise him?
- Parbleu! At Gassot's he stuck his head in flour and here he sticks it in shoe polish.
When the performance of the nigger-melodits was over, Bob came to us, and, from the way he approached Mattia, I saw how much my comrade knew how to make himself loved. A brother could not have had more joy in his eyes or in his accent than this former clown, "who, because of the hard times," he told us, "had been obliged to become an itinerant musician". But they soon had to separate, he to follow his band, we to go to a district where he would not go; and the two friends postponed until the following Sunday the pleasure of telling each other what each had done since they had parted. Out of friendship for Mattia, no doubt, Bob was kind enough to show me some sympathy, and soon we had a friend who, by his experience and advice, made life in London much easier for us than it had been until then. He also took a great liking to Capi, and often told us with envy that, if he had a dog like that, his fortune would soon be made. More than once he also suggested that the three of us, that is to say the four of us, he, Mattia, Capi and I, should become partners; but if I didn't want to leave my family to go back to France to see Lise and my old friends, I wanted even less to follow Bob across England.
That's how we got through Christmas, and instead of leaving the Red Lion Court in the morning, we set off every evening at about eight or nine o'clock to our chosen quarters.
After Christmas, we had to go out during the day, and our chances of seeing Mr James Milligan diminished greatly. We had little more hope than on Sundays, so we often stayed at home instead of going out on this day of freedom, which could have been a day of recreation.
We waited.
Without saying what was worrying us, Mattia had opened up to his friend Bob and asked him if there was any way of finding the address of a Mrs Milligan, who had a paralysed son, or even simply that of Mr James Milligan. But Bob replied that we would need to know who this Mrs Milligan was and also what Mr James Milligan's profession or social position was, given that the name Milligan was borne by a number of people in London and an even greater number in England.
We hadn't thought about that. For us there was only one Mrs Milligan, who was Arthur's mother, and one Mr James Milligan, who was Arthur's father. James Milligan, who was Arthur's uncle.
Then Mattia started to tell me again that we had to go back to France, and our discussions resumed.
I'm afraid," continued Mattia, "let's go; you'll see that some catastrophe will befall us, let's go.
But although my family's attitude towards me had not changed, although my grandfather continued to spit furiously at me, although my father only spoke a few words of command to me, although my mother never had a glance for me, although my brothers were inexhaustible in inventing bad tricks to harm me, though Annie disliked me at every opportunity, though Kate was only fond of the sweets I brought her, I could not bring myself to follow Mattia's advice, any more than I could believe him when he said I was not 'Master Driscoll's son'. To doubt, yes, I could, I could only too well; but to believe firmly that I was or was not a Driscoll, I could not.
Time passed slowly, very slowly, but at last the days added to the days, the weeks to the weeks, and the time came for the family to leave London and travel around England.
The two carriages had been repainted and loaded with all the goods they could hold and which would be sold during the summer.
How many things and how marvellous that they could be crammed into these carriages: fabrics, knitwear, caps, scarves, handkerchiefs, stockings, pants, waistcoats, buttons, thread, cotton, sewing wool, knitting wool, needles, scissors, razors, earrings, rings, soaps, ointments, shoe polish, ironing stones, powders to treat horse and dog ailments, essences to remove stains, waters to treat toothache, drugs to make hair grow and others to dye it! 
My father, having found that we were making good money with our violin and harp, decided that we would leave with him, but that we would remain musicians, and he told us so the day before our departure.
On the very day of our departure, I saw how these goods, which had cost so little, were sold: we had arrived in a large village, and the carriages had been lined up in the main square; one of the sides, made up of several panels, had been lowered, and the whole display had been presented to the curiosity of the buyers.
"As I never pay for my goods, that allows me to sell them cheaply; I don't sell them, I give them away.
And I heard people who had looked at these prices say as they went away:
"These must be stolen goods.
- He said so himself.
If they had cast their eyes my way, the redness of my forehead would have taught them how well-founded their suppositions were.
If they did not see this redness, Mattia did, and that evening he spoke to me about it, although he usually avoided frankly broaching the subject.
"Will you always be able to bear this shame?
- Don't talk to me about it, if you don't want to make this shame even more cruel.
- That's not what I want. I want us to go back to France. I always told you there would be a catastrophe; I'm telling you again, and I have a feeling it won't be long. You have to understand that there will be police who, one day or another, will want to know how Master Driscoll is selling his goods so cheaply: so what will happen?
- Mattia, please...
- Since you don't want to see, I'll have to see for you; it'll happen that we'll all be arrested, even you, even me, who didn't do anything. How can we prove that we've done nothing? How can we defend ourselves? Isn't it true that we eat the bread paid for with the money from these goods?"
This idea had never occurred to me before; it hit me like a hammer on the head.
I had never been so deeply disturbed by Mattia's words, reasoning and prayers, and when I remembered them, I said to myself that the irresolution in which I was struggling was cowardly and that I should make up my mind and decide at last what I wanted.
Circumstances did what I didn't dare to do myself.
It was several weeks since we had left London, and we had arrived in a town near where there were to be races. In England horse races are not what they are in France, a mere amusement for rich people who come to see three or four horses struggle, show themselves off, and risk a few louis in bets: they are a popular festival for the region, and it is not the horses alone that give the spectacle: On the moor or on the dunes which serve as a racecourse, sometimes several days in advance, acrobats, gypsies and itinerant merchants arrive to hold a sort of fair: we had hurried to take our place in this fair, we as musicians, the Driscoll family as merchants. 
But instead of coming to the racecourse, my father had settled in the town itself, where he no doubt thought he could do better business.
Arriving early and not having to work at displaying the goods, Mattia and I went to see the racecourse, which was situated quite a short distance from the town, on a heath. Numerous tents were erected, and from a distance we could see small columns of smoke here and there marking the square and the boundaries of the racecourse. It wasn't long before we came out onto a sunken track on the moor, which is barren and bare in normal weather, but where that evening we could see plank sheds in which cabarets and even hotels had been set up, barracks, tents, cars or simply bivouacs around which people in picturesque rags were crowding.
As we passed one of these fires, over which a cooking pot was suspended, we recognised our friend Bob. He was delighted to see us. He had come to the races with two of his comrades, to give performances of exercises of strength and skill; but the musicians on whom they were relying had failed them, so that their day of the following day, instead of being fruitful as they had hoped, would probably be detestable. If we wanted to, we could do them a great favour: we could replace these musicians, and the proceeds would be shared between the five of us; Capi would even get a cut.
From the look Mattia gave me, I understood that it would please my comrade to accept Bob's proposal, and as we were free to do what we liked, on the sole condition that we brought in a good profit, I accepted.
It was therefore agreed that the next day we would come and make ourselves available to Bob and his two friends.
But on the way back to town, a difficulty arose when I told my father about the arrangement.
I need Capi tomorrow," he said, "and you won't be able to take him.
But my father immediately allayed my fears:
Capi has a keen ear," he said, "he hears everything and keeps a good lookout; he will be useful to us for the carriages, because in the midst of this confusion of people, we could well be robbed. You will therefore go alone to play with Bob, and if your work continues late into the night, which is likely, you will join us at the Gros Chêne inn where we will sleep, as my intention is to leave here at nightfall."
The next morning, after taking Capi for a walk, giving him food and water to make sure he had everything he needed, I tied him to the axle of the carriage he was to guard, and Mattia and I set off for the racecourse.
As soon as we arrived, we began to play, and it lasted without rest until the evening; my fingertips ached as if they had been pricked by thousands of thorns, and Mattia had blown so much into his piston cornet that he could no longer breathe. But we had to keep on playing; Bob and his friends never tired of doing their tricks, and we couldn't tire of them any more than they did. When evening came, I thought we were going to rest, but we abandoned our tent for a large plank cabaret, and there the exercises and music resumed in earnest. This went on until after midnight; I was still making a bit of a racket with my harp, but I didn't really know what I was playing, and Mattia didn't know any better. Twenty times Bob had announced that this was the last performance, and twenty times we had started a new one.
If we were tired, our comrades, who were expending much more energy than we were, were exhausted: so they had already missed more than one of their tricks. At one point, a large pole used for their exercises fell on the end of Mattia's foot; the pain was so severe that Mattia screamed; I thought his foot had been crushed, and Bob and I rushed to him. Fortunately the wound was not so serious; it was bruised and the flesh was torn, but the bones were not broken. But Mattia couldn't walk.
What was to be done?
It was decided that he would stay the night in Bob's carriage and that I would go to the Gros Chêne Inn on my own; didn't I need to know where the Driscoll family were going the next day?
Despite my tiredness, I walked quickly and eventually arrived at the Gros Chêne inn, but no matter how hard I looked for our carriages, I couldn't find them. There were two or three miserable canvas-covered carts, a large plank shack and two covered wagons from which came the cries of wild beasts as I approached; but the beautiful, brightly coloured carriages of the Driscoll family, I saw them nowhere.
As I circled the inn, I saw a light shining through a glass transom, and thinking that not everyone had gone to bed, I knocked on the door. The bad-faced innkeeper, whom I had noticed the day before, opened the door himself and shone his lantern in my face. I saw that he recognised me, but instead of giving way to me, he put his lantern behind his back, looked around and listened for a few seconds.
Your carriages have left," he said, "and your father has recommended that you join him at Lewes without losing time, and walking all night. Bon voyage!"
And he closed the door in my face without saying anything more.
I set off again and, an hour and a half later, I was lying on a good bale of straw next to Mattia in Bob's car, and in a few words I told him what had happened, then I fell asleep dead tired.
A few hours' sleep restored my strength and in the morning I woke up ready to leave for Lewes, if Mattia, who was still asleep, could follow me.
I got out of the car and made my way towards our friend Bob, who had got up before me and was busy lighting his fire; I was looking at him, lying on all fours and blowing as hard as he could under the pot, when it seemed to me that I recognised Capi, who was being led on a leash by a policeman.
Stunned, I remained motionless, wondering what this could mean; but Capi, who had recognised me, had given a strong jerk to the leash which had escaped from the policeman's hands; then,* * in a few jumps, he had run to me and jumped into my arms.
The policeman approached:
"This dog is yours, isn't it?
- He asked.
- Well, I'm arresting you.
And his hand came down on my arm, gripping it tightly.
The police officer's words and gesture had made Bob stand up; he came forward:
"What are you arresting that boy for?
- Are you his brother?
- No, I'm his friend.
- A man and a child entered St. George's Church last night through a high window and by means of a ladder; they had this dog with them to give them warning if they were disturbed; that's what happened; in their surprise, they didn't have time to take the dog with them when they fled through the window, and the dog, unable to follow them, was found in the church; with the dog, I was quite sure of discovering the thieves, and I've got one; where's the father now? "
I don't know whether this question was addressed to Bob or to me; I didn't answer it, I was devastated.
And yet I understood what had happened; in spite of myself I guessed it: it wasn't to guard the cars that Capi had been asked to come, it was because he had a good ear and could warn off anyone who might be stealing from the church; and it wasn't just for the pleasure of going to bed at the Gros Chêne inn that the cars had left at dusk; if they hadn't stopped at the inn, it was because, the theft having been discovered, they had to get away as quickly as possible. 
But it wasn't the culprits I had to think about, it was myself; whoever they were, I could defend myself and, without accusing them, prove my innocence.
Explain to him that I am not guilty," I said to Bob, "since I stayed with you until one o'clock in the morning; I went to the Auberge du Gros Chêne where I spoke to the innkeeper, and immediately came back here."
Bob translated my words to the agent, but he did not seem convinced as I had hoped, quite the contrary.
It was the second time I had been arrested, and yet the shame that suffocated me was even more poignant. It was no longer a question of a silly accusation like the one about our cow; if I came out innocent of this accusation, wouldn't I have the pain of seeing those whose accomplice I was believed to be condemned, rightly condemned?
I had to cross, held by the policeman, the hedge of onlookers who rushed past us; but I was not hounded and threatened as in France, for those who came to look at me were not peasants, but people who, all or almost all, lived at war with the police, acrobats, cabaret owners, gypsies, tramps, as the English say, in other words vagabonds.
The prison where I was kept was a real prison with a window grilled with thick iron bars, the very sight of which killed any idea of escape. The furniture consisted of a bench to sit on and a hammock to lie on.
I let myself fall onto this bench and stayed there for a long time, overwhelmed, reflecting on my sad condition, but without any follow-up, because it was impossible for me to join two ideas and move from one to the other.
When I had seen the jailer enter my prison, I had felt a movement of satisfaction and a sort of surge of hope, because ever since I had been locked up, I had been tormented and feverish by a question that I had been asking myself without finding an answer:
"When would the magistrate question me? When would I be able to defend myself?
I had heard stories of prisoners being held for months without trial or interrogation, which to me was one and the same thing, and I didn't know that in England there was never more than a day or two between arrest and public appearance before a magistrate.
This question, which I could not answer, was the first I put to the jailer, who did not seem a bad man, and he was kind enough to tell me that I would certainly appear at the hearing the next day.
The next morning, the gaoler entered my prison carrying a jug and a basin; he urged me to wash up, if I felt like it, because I was soon to appear before the magistrate, and he added that decent dress was sometimes the best way for an accused person to defend himself.
The gaoler returned and told me to follow him; I walked beside him and, after crossing several corridors, we found ourselves in front of a small door which he opened.
"Go through," he said.
A warm air blew in my face and I heard a confused buzzing. I entered and found myself in a small gallery; I was in the courtroom.
Although I was in the grip of a sort of hallucination and felt the arteries in my forehead throbbing as if they were about to burst, in a glance thrown circularly around me I had a clear and complete vision of what surrounded me, -- the courtroom and the people who filled it.
On a high platform sat the judge; lower down and in front of him sat three other members of the judiciary who were, as I found out later, a clerk, a treasurer for fines, and another magistrate known in France as the public prosecutor; in front of my podium was a figure in a gown and wig, my lawyer.
How did I get a lawyer? Where did he come from? Who had given him to me? Was it Mattia and Bob? These were questions that it was not time to examine. I had a lawyer, that was enough.
In another gallery, I saw Bob himself, his two comrades, the innkeeper at the Gros Chêne, and people I didn't know, then, in another opposite, I recognised the policeman who had arrested me; several people were with him; I realised that these were the witness galleries.
The area reserved for the public was full. Our eyes met and we kissed, and instantly I felt my courage rise. I would be defended, it was up to me not to give up and to defend myself; I was no longer crushed by all the stares directed at me.
The public prosecutor took the floor, and in a few words - he seemed in a great hurry - he explained the case: "The thieves, a man and a child, had got into the church by means of a ladder and by breaking a window; they had a dog with them which they had brought along to keep watch and warn them of the danger, if any arose; a passer-by who had been lingering, it was a quarter past one at the time, had been surprised to see a faint light in the church, he had listened and he had heard cracking noises; This dog, led to the racecourse by Constable Jerry, whose intelligence and zeal cannot be too highly praised, recognised his master, who was none other than the accused present in the pew; as for the second thief, we were on his trail. "
After a few considerations that proved my guilt, the prosecution fell silent, and a yelping voice shouted: "Silence!
The judge then, without turning to my side, and as if speaking for himself, asked me my name, age and profession.
I answered in English that my name was Francis Driscoll and that I lived with my parents in London, in the Red Lion Court, in Bethnal-Green; then I asked permission to explain myself in French, as I had been brought up in France and had only been in England for a few months.
Don't think you're fooling me," said the judge sternly, "I know French.
So I gave my account in French, and explained how it was quite impossible for me to be in the church at one o'clock, since at that hour I was at the racecourse, and at half-past two I was at the Gros Chêne inn.
"And how do you explain the presence of your dog in the church?
- I don't explain it, I don't even understand it; my dog wasn't with me, I had tied him up in the morning under one of our cars.
It was not convenient for me to say any more, for I did not want to give weapons against my father; I looked at Mattia, he beckoned me to continue, but I did not.
They called a witness and made him swear an oath on the Gospel to tell the truth without hatred or passion.
He was a fat, short man with a prodigiously majestic air, despite his red face and bluish nose; before swearing, he genuflected to the court and straightened up, regaling himself: he was the beadle of the parish of Saint-George.
He began by recounting at length how disturbed and scandalised he had been when he was suddenly woken up to tell him that there were thieves in the church; His first thought had been that they wanted to play a bad joke on him, but, as one does not play jokes on people of his character, he had understood that something serious was going on; he had then dressed so hastily that he had popped two buttons on his waistcoat; finally he had run; he had opened the church door, and he had found.... who? or rather what? a dog.
I had nothing to say to that, but my lawyer, who had said nothing until then, stood up, shook off his wig, pulled his robe over his shoulders and spoke.
"Who locked the church door last night?
- I did," replied the beadle, "as was my duty.
- Are you sure?
- When I do something, I'm sure I do it.
- And when you don't do it?
- I'm sure I didn't do it.
- Very well; then you can swear that you didn't lock the dog in the church?
- If the dog had been in the church, I would have seen it.
- Do you have good eyes?
- I have eyes like everyone else.
- Six months ago, didn't you walk into a calf hanging belly-up outside a butcher's shop?
- I don't see the importance of such a question to a man of my character," exclaimed the beadle, turning blue.
- Would you be so kind as to answer it as if it were really important?
- It's true that I bumped into an animal awkwardly displayed in front of a butcher's shop.
- So you hadn't seen it?
- I was preoccupied.
- You had just had dinner when you closed the church door?
- I certainly had.
- And when you went into that calf, hadn't you just had dinner?
- But, er...
- You say you hadn't had dinner?
- Yes, I had.
- Do you drink small beer or strong beer?
- Strong beer.
- How many pints?
- Two pints.
- Never more?
- Sometimes three.
- Never four? Never six?
- That's very rare.
- Don't you drink grog after dinner?
- Sometimes.
- Do you like it strong or weak?
- Not too weak.
- How many glasses do you drink?
- It depends.
- Are you prepared to swear that you don't sometimes take three or even four glasses?
As the beadle, increasingly blue, did not answer, the lawyer sat down and, while sitting down, he said:
"This examination is sufficient to prove that the dog may have been locked up in the church by the witness who, after dinner, does not see the calves because he is preoccupied; that was all I wished to know."
If I had dared, I would have kissed my lawyer; I was saved.
Why wouldn't Capi have been locked up in the church? It was possible. And if he had been locked up that way, it wasn't me who had brought him in: so I wasn't guilty, since there was only that charge against me.
After the beadle, the people who had been with him when he entered the church were heard, but they had seen nothing except the open window through which the thieves had flown.
Then my witnesses were heard: Bob, his comrades, the innkeeper, all of whom gave an account of my time; however, only one point remained unclarified, and it was crucial, since it concerned the precise time at which I had left the racecourse.
When the questioning was over, the judge asked me if I had anything to say, warning me that I could remain silent if I wished.
I replied that I was innocent and that I would leave it to the justice of the court.
Then the judge read out the minutes of the statements I had just heard, and declared that I would be transferred to the county prison to wait there for the grand jury to decide whether or not I would be brought before the assizes.
The Assizes!
I sank back on my bench; alas, what had I not listened to Mattia!
XVIII -- Bob
It was not until long after I had been returned to my prison that I found a reason to explain to myself why I had not been acquitted: the judge wanted to wait for the arrest of those who had entered the church, to see if I was not their accomplice. We were on their trail," said the prosecution, "so I would have the pain and shame of appearing in court alongside them.
When would that happen? When would I be transferred to the county jail? What was this prison? Where was it? Was it sadder than the one I was in?
There was enough in these questions to occupy my mind, and the time passed more quickly than the day before; I was no longer under the effect of impatience which gives fever; I knew I had to wait.
I knew that I had to wait. And I waited, sometimes walking, sometimes sitting on my bench.
A little before nightfall I heard a piston cornet ring out, and I recognised Mattia's way of playing. He was trying to tell me that he was thinking of me and that he was watching over me. The sound came to me over the wall opposite my window; Mattia was obviously on the other side of the wall, in the street, and we were only a few metres apart. Unfortunately, our eyes can't pierce stone. But if you can't look through walls, sound can. The sounds of the cornet were joined by footsteps and vague rumours, and I realised that Mattia and Bob were probably giving a performance.
Why had they chosen this place? Was it because it was favourable for their takings, or did they want to give me a warning? Suddenly I heard a clear voice, Mattia's, shouting in French: "Demain matin au petit jour!
And then the noise from the cornet started up again.
It didn't take much intelligence to work out that Mattia wasn't talking to his English audience, but to me; but it wasn't so easy to work out what they meant, and again I asked myself a whole series of questions to which I couldn't find any reasonable answers.
Only one fact was clear and precise: at dawn the next morning I had to be awake and on my guard; until then I had only to be patient, if I could.
As soon as night had fallen, I lay down in my hammock and tried to fall asleep; I heard the clocks in the vicinity strike several hours in succession, then, in the end, sleep overtook me and carried me away on its wings.
It was the approach of daylight; roosters crowed in the distance.
I got up and, tiptoeing, went to open my window; it was a delicate job to stop it cracking, but at last, by going about it gently and above all slowly, I got the job done.
At last I thought I heard a scratching against the wall, but as I had not heard any footsteps before, I thought I was mistaken. But I listened. The scratching continued; then suddenly I saw a head rising above the wall; I saw at once that it was not Mattia's, and, although it was still dark, I recognised Bob.
He saw me pressed against my bars.
"Hush!" he said faintly.
And with his hand he gave me a sign which seemed to mean that I should move away from the window. Without understanding, I obeyed. Then his other hand seemed to be armed with a long tube, shining as if it were made of glass. He put it to his mouth. I realised it was a blowpipe. I heard a gasp and at the same time saw a small white ball pass through the air and fall at my feet. Instantly Bob's head disappeared behind the wall and I heard nothing more.
I rushed over to the ball; it was made of thin paper rolled and packed around a large grain of lead. It seemed to me that there was writing on it, but it wasn't yet light enough for me to read it, so I had to wait until daylight.
I* *closed my window carefully and quickly lay down in my hammock, holding the ball of paper in my hand.
Slowly, very slowly for my impatience, the dawn turned yellow, and in the end a pink glow crept over my walls; I unrolled my paper and read:
I unrolled my paper and read: "You are to be transferred tomorrow night to the county jail; you will travel by rail in a second-class compartment with a policeman; stand by the door through which you will board; when you have driven for forty-five minutes (count them well) your train will slow down for a junction; then open your door and throw yourself down bravely; As soon as you're on the ground, climb the embankment on the left, we'll be there with a carriage and a good horse to take you away; don't be afraid; two days later we'll be in France; good luck and good hope; above all, jump out into the distance and land on your feet. "
Saved! I* *wouldn't appear in court; I wouldn't see what would happen there! Ah, good Mattia, good Bob! for it was he, I was sure, who was generously helping Mattia: "We'll be there with a good horse"; it wasn't Mattia alone who had been able to put this arrangement together.
The time passed quickly enough, and the next day, in the afternoon, a policeman I didn't know entered my cell and told me to follow him. I was pleased to see that he was a man of about fifty who did not seem very flexible.
Things were arranged according to Mattia's instructions, and when the train started, I was placed near the door through which I had climbed; I was going backwards; the policeman was opposite me; we were alone in our compartment.
I was leaning against the door, the window of which was open; I asked him for permission to look at the country we were passing through, and, as he wanted to "win my goodwill", he replied that I could look as long as I liked. What did he have to fear? The train was travelling at high speed.
Soon, the air in front of him having chilled him, he moved away from the door and stood in the middle of the carriage. As for me, I was not sensitive to the cold; gently sliding my left hand out I turned the handle and with my right I held the door.
Time passed; the engine whistled and slowed down. The moment had come; I pushed the door open quickly and jumped as far as I could; I was thrown into the ditch; fortunately my hands, which I was holding in front, came to rest against the grassy bank; however, the impact was so violent that I rolled to the ground, unconscious.
When I came to, I thought I was still on the railway, because I felt myself being carried away by a rapid movement, and I heard a roll; I was lying on a bed of straw.
Strangely enough, my face was wet and a soft, warm caress was passing over my cheeks and forehead.
I opened my eyes and a dog, an ugly yellow dog, was leaning over me, licking me. My eyes met those of Mattia, who was kneeling beside me.
You're safe now," he said, pushing the dog away and kissing me.
- Where are we now?
- In the car; Bob's driving us.
- How's it going?" asked Bob, turning round.
- I don't know; fine, I think.
- Wiggle your arms, wiggle your legs," shouted Bob.
I was lying on the straw and did as he told me.
Well," said Mattia, "nothing's broken.
- But what happened?
- You jumped off the train, as I recommended, but the jolt made you dizzy and you fell into the ditch; then not seeing you coming, Bob tumbled down the embankment while I was holding the horse, and he carried you back in his arms. We thought you were dead. What a fright! what pain! but you're safe now.
- And the policeman?
- He's going on with the train, which hasn't stopped.
I knew the main thing; I looked around and saw the yellow dog looking at me tenderly with eyes that looked like Capi's; but it wasn't Capi, because Capi was white.
And Capi!" I said, "where is he?
Before Mattia had answered, the yellow dog had jumped on me and was licking me, crying.
But here he is," said Mattia, "we've had him dyed.
I returned good Capi's caresses and kissed him.
Why did you dye it?" I said.
- It's a story, I'll tell you".
But Bob would not allow this story to be told.
Drive the horse," he said to Mattia, "and hold it tight; meanwhile I'll arrange the carriage so that it won't be recognised at the gates."
This carriage was covered with a canvas tarpaulin laid on hoops; he laid the hoops in the carriage and, having folded the tarpaulin in four, told me to cover myself with it; then he sent Mattia away, advising him to hide under the tarpaulin. By this means, the carriage changed its entire appearance, it no longer had a tarpaulin and it only contained one person instead of three. If anyone came after us, the description that people who saw the carriage go by would give would confuse the search.
Where are we going?" I asked Mattia as he lay down beside me.
- To Littlehampton: it's a little port on the sea, where Bob has a brother who commands a boat making the voyages from France to fetch butter and eggs in Normandy, at Isigny; if we save ourselves - and we will - it will be to Bob that we owe it. He did everything; what could I have done for you, poor wretch! It was Bob's idea to make you jump off the train, to give you my ticket, and it was he who got his comrades to lend us that horse; and it was he who was going to get us a boat to France, because you must think that if you wanted to get on a steamer you'd be arrested. You see, it's good to have friends.
- Whose idea was it to take Capi?
- Me, but it was Bob's idea to dye him yellow so that he wouldn't be recognised, when we stole him from Constable Jerry, clever Jerry, as the judge said, who wasn't too clever this time, because he let Capi get the better of him without noticing; it's true that Capi, having smelt me, did almost everything, and then Bob knows all the tricks of the dog thief.
- And your foot?
- Healed, or more or less, I haven't had time to think about it.
However, our horse, vigorously led by Bob, continued to speed along the deserted road. Only now and then did we come across a few cars, none of which overtook us. The villages we passed were silent, and there was hardly a window where a light could be seen; only a few dogs took notice of our fast pace and chased us with their barking. When Bob stopped his horse to let it breathe after a short climb, we got out of the carriage and stuck our heads to the ground to listen, but Mattia himself, who had a keener ear than we did, heard no suspicious noise; we were travelling in the midst of the shadows and silence of the night.
We were no longer hiding under the tarpaulin, but protecting ourselves from the cold, because a cold breeze had been blowing for quite some time. When we ran our tongues over our lips, we found a taste of salt; we were getting close to the sea. Soon we saw a light that disappeared at regular intervals, only to reappear brightly; it was a lighthouse and we were on our way. Bob stopped his horse and, bringing it to a walk, led it gently along a side road; then, dismounting, he told us to stay there and hold the horse; for his part, he was going to see if his brother had not left and if we could safely embark on board his brother's ship.
I must admit that the time Bob was away seemed long, very long. We did not speak, and we could hear the sea breaking on the shore a short distance away with a monotonous noise that redoubled our emotion. Mattia trembled as I did.
At last we heard the sound of footsteps on the path Bob had followed. No doubt it was him coming back; my fate was about to be decided.
Bob was not alone. As he approached us, we saw that someone was accompanying him; it was a man dressed in an oilskin jacket and wearing a woollen cap.
This is my brother," said Bob; "he is willing to take you on board; he will drive you, and we will separate, for no one need know that I have come here.
We followed Bob's brother, and soon entered the silent streets of the city, and after a few detours found ourselves on a quay, and the wind of the sea struck us in the face. Without saying a word, Bob's brother pointed to a sloop-rigged ship; we knew it was his, and in a few minutes we were on board, when he took us down to a small cabin.
I won't be leaving for two hours," he said, "so stay there and don't make any noise.
When he had locked the cabin door, Mattia threw himself into my arms and kissed me quietly; he was no longer trembling.
XIX -- The Swan
After the departure of Bob's brother, the ship was silent for some time, and we heard only the sound of the wind on the mast and the lapping of the water against the hull; pulleys creaked; chains were wound and unwound; the capstan was turned; a sail was hoisted; the rudder groaned, and suddenly, as the boat tilted to the left, a pitching motion occurred. We were on our way, I was saved.
Slow and gentle at first, this pitching movement soon became fast and hard; the ship lowered as she rolled, and suddenly violent gales struck against her bow or right-hand planking.
Poor Mattia!" I said to my comrade, taking his hand.
- It doesn't matter," he said, "you're safe; besides, I knew it would be like this. When we were in the carriage, I looked at the trees whose tops were shaken by the wind, and I said to myself that we were going to dance on the sea; it dances.
A whole day at sea, even more than a day, poor Mattia! and it gave him pleasure to be seasick.
We disembarked in France with only our clothes and instruments, Mattia having taken care to take my harp, which I had left in Bob's tent the night I had been at the Auberge du Gros Chêne. As for our bags, they had been left with their contents in the Driscoll family's carriages; this caused us some embarrassment, for we could not resume our wandering life without shirts and stockings, especially without a map.
Our first task on leaving the Eclipse was to look for an old soldier's bag and then to buy two shirts, two pairs of stockings, a bar of soap, a comb, thread, buttons, needles and, lastly, what was even more essential than these objects, although so useful, a map of France.
Where to go now that we were in France? What route should we take? How were we to find our way?
As far as I'm concerned," said Mattia, "I have no preference, and I'm ready to go right or left.
- And that is?
- To follow the course of a river or a canal, because I have an idea.
As I didn't ask Mattia to tell me his idea, he continued:
"When Arthur was ill, Mrs Milligan took him for a boat ride, and that's how you met her on The Swan.
- He's not ill any more.
-- He was very ill, on the contrary, and was only saved by his mother's care. So my idea is that, in order to cure him completely, Mrs Milligan takes him on a boat trip along the rivers and canals that can carry The Swan, so that by following the course of these rivers and canals we have a chance of meeting The Swan.
-- Who says that Le Cygne is in France?
-- Nothing. However, as Le Cygne cannot go to sea, we have to believe that he has not left France; we have a good chance of finding him. If we only had one, don't you think we should risk it? I want Mrs Milligan to be found, and I think we should leave no stone unturned.
The map was spread out on the grass of the path, and we looked for the nearest river; we found that it was the Seine.
Well, let's go to the Seine," said Mattia. We'll ask the bargemen and the hauliers along the river, and as Le Cygne with her veranda doesn't look like the other boats, we'll have noticed her if she's passed on the Seine; if we don't find her on the Seine, we'll look for her on the Loire, on the Garonne, on all the rivers of France, and we'll end up finding her.
I had no objections to Mattia's idea, so it was decided that we would go up the Seine and sail alongside it.
After thinking about ourselves, it was time to look after Capi; dyed yellow, Capi was not Capi to me; we bought some soft soap, and at the first river we found, we scrubbed him vigorously, taking turns when we were tired.
As we weren't just walking to get ahead, but also had to earn our daily bread, it took us five weeks to get from Isigny to Charenton.
There a question arose: should we follow the Seine, or should we follow the Marne? I had asked myself this many times while studying my map, but without finding any better reasons for one route than another.
Fortunately, when we arrived at Charenton, we didn't have to make up our minds, because, when we asked, we were told for the first time that we had seen a boat that looked like the Swan; it was a pleasure boat and had a veranda.
Mattia was so happy that he started dancing on the quay; then, suddenly, he stopped dancing, picked up his violin and frantically played a triumphal march.
In the meantime, I continued to question the sailor who had kindly given us his answer: there could be no doubt that it was Le Cygne; he had spent about two months in Charenton, sailing up the Seine.
We don't need to stop and question people now, Le Cygne is ahead of us; all we have to do is follow the Seine.
But at Moret, the Loing flows into the Seine, and we have to start our questions again.
Le Cygne has gone up the Seine.
At Montereau, we had to start again.
This time Le Cygne has left the Seine for the Yonne; it is just over two months since she left Montereau; she has an English lady on board and a young boy lying on her bed.
We are getting closer to Lise as we follow Le Cygne, and my heart is pounding as I study my map and wonder whether, after Joigny, Mrs Milligan will have chosen the Burgundy or the Nivernais canal.
We arrive at the confluence of the Yonne and the Armençon; Le Cygne has continued up the Yonne: we shall therefore pass through Dreuzy and see Lise; she herself will tell us about Mrs Milligan and Arthur.
As the Yonne makes many detours between Joigny and Auxerre, we who were following the main road regained some time on Le Cygne; but from Auxerre onwards, we lost some, as Le Cygne, having taken the Nivernais canal, had run fast on its calm waters.
We heard from her at every lock, because on this canal, where navigation is not very active, everyone had noticed this boat, which bore so little resemblance to those we normally see.
Not only were we told about the Swan, but we were also told about Mrs Milligan, "a very good English lady", and Arthur, "a young boy who almost always lay in a bed on deck, sheltered by a veranda lined with greenery and flowers, but who also got up sometimes".
So Arthur was better.
We were approaching Dreuzy; two more days, one more, just a few more hours.
At last we could see the woods where we had played with Lise the previous autumn, and we could also see the lock with Lady Catherine's cottage.
Without saying anything to each other, but by mutual agreement, Mattia and I quickened our pace, no longer walking, but running; Capi, who found himself, galloped ahead.
He's going to tell Lise that we're coming; she's going to meet us.
But it's not Lise we see running out of the house, it's Capi who's running away as if he'd been chased.
We both stop instantly and ask ourselves what this could mean; what has happened? But neither of us asked the question, and we resumed our walk.
Capi has come back to us, and he's walking sheepishly at our heels.
A man is operating a sluice gate; it's not Lise's uncle.
We went up to the house; a woman we didn't know came and went in the kitchen.
"Madame Suriot?" we ask.
She looked at us for a moment before answering, as if we were asking her an absurd question.
She's no longer here," she said at the end.
- And where is she now?
- In Egypt.
Mattia and I stare at each other, dumbfounded. In Egypt! We don't know exactly what Egypt is, or where it is; but vaguely, we think it's far, far away, somewhere beyond the seas.
"And Lise? Do you know Lise?
- Of course! Lise went on a boat trip with an English lady."
Lise on The Swan! Are we dreaming?
The woman replied that we were in reality.
Are you Rémi?" she asked.
- She asks me.
- Well, when Suriot was drowned," she said.
- Drowned!
- Drowned in the lock. Oh, you didn't know that Suriot had fallen into the water and got caught on a nail when he went under a barge; that's the way it works too often. So when he was drowned, Catherine found herself quite embarrassed, even though she was a mistress. But what do you expect? When money's tight, you can't make it overnight, and the money was tight. It's true that Catherine had been offered the chance to go to Egypt to bring up the children of a lady whose nurse she had been; but what was bothering her was her niece, little Lise. As she was wondering what to do, one evening an English lady stopped at the lock to take her sick son for a walk. We had a chat. And the English lady, who was looking for a child to play with her son, who was bored all alone on his boat, asked for Lise, promising to take care of her, get her well, and finally ensure her future. She was a good lady, kind and gentle to the poor. Catherine accepted, and while Lise boarded the English lady's boat, Catherine left for Egypt. My husband replaced Suriot. So, before leaving, Lise, who can't speak, although the doctors say she might one day, so Lise wants her aunt to explain to me that I have to tell you all this, if you come to see her. There you go."
I was so stunned that I couldn't think of a word, but Mattia didn't lose his head like I did.
"And where was the English lady going?
- To the south of France or to Switzerland; Lise was to have written to me so that I could give you her address, but I have received no letter."
XX -- The beautiful swaddlers were right
As I remained speechless, Mattia did what I had not thought to do.
"We thank you very much, madam," he said.
And gently pushing me, he took me out of the kitchen.
On our way," he said, "on our way! It's not just Arthur and Mrs Milligan we have to get to, it's Lise too. How nice! We would have lost time at Dreuzy, but now we can go on our way; that's what we call luck. We've had enough bad luck, now we've got some good luck; the wind has changed. Who knows what good things are going to come our way!
And we continued our race after Le Cygne, without wasting any time, stopping only long enough to sleep and earn a few pennies.
At Decize, where the Canal du Nivernais flows into the Loire, we asked for news of Le Cygne: he had taken the lateral canal, and it was this canal that we followed as far as Digoin; there we took the Canal du Centre as far as Chalon.
My map tells me that if we went directly to Mâcon via Charolles, we would avoid a long diversions and many days of walking; but this is a bold decision that neither of us dares to take after discussing the pros and cons, because Le Cygne may have stopped on the way, in which case we would have to overtake him: we would therefore have to retrace our steps and, in an attempt to save time, lose time.
We sailed down the Saône from Chalon to Lyon.
In the midst of the movement of boats coming and going on the Rhône and the Saône, Le Cygne may have gone unnoticed. We questioned the bargemen, the boatmen and all the people who lived on the quays, and in the end we were certain that Mrs Milligan had gone to Switzerland: so we followed the course of the Rhône.
From Lyon onwards we gained access to Le Cygne, because the fast-flowing Rhône is not as easy to navigate as the Seine. At Culoz, it is only six weeks ahead of us; however, studying the map, I doubt that we will be able to reach it before Switzerland, as I do not know that the Rhône is not navigable as far as Lake Geneva, and we imagine that it is on Le Cygne that Mrs Milligan wants to visit Switzerland, whose map we do not have.
We arrived at Seyssel, a town divided in two by the river, over which a suspension bridge was built, and we went down to the riverbank. What a surprise it was when, from a distance, I thought I recognised Le Cygne!
We started running: it's his shape, it's him, and yet he looks like an abandoned boat; he's firmly moored behind a sort of jetty that protects him, and everything on board is closed; there are no more flowers on the veranda.
What's happened to Arthur? What has happened to Arthur?
We stopped, our hearts choking with anguish. A man we questioned was willing to answer us; it was he who was in charge of guarding The Swan.
"The English lady who was on the boat with her two children, a paralysed boy and a mute little girl, is in Switzerland. She abandoned her boat because it couldn't go any further up the Rhône. The lady and the two children left in a carriage with a maid; the other servants followed with the luggage; she will return in the autumn to take Le Cygne back, sail down the Rhône to the sea, and spend the winter in the Midi."
We breathed. None of the fears that had assailed us were reasonable; we should have imagined the good, instead of immediately going for the worst.
And where is this lady now?" asked Mattia.
- She's gone to rent a country house on the shores of Lake Geneva, near Vevey, but I don't know exactly where; she'll be there for the summer.
Off to Vevey! Now Le Cygne was no longer running ahead of us, and since Mrs Milligan was to spend the summer in her country house, we were sure to find her; all we had to do was look.
And so, four days after leaving Seyssel, we searched the area around Vevey, among the many villas that, starting from the blue lake, gracefully spread out on the green and wooded slopes of the mountain, for the one inhabited by Mrs Milligan, Arthur and Lise.
The best thing to do is to look for and visit all the houses where strangers can stay; in reality this is not very difficult, all we have to do is play our repertoire in all the streets.
One afternoon, we gave a concert in the middle of the street, with only a gate in front of us for which we sang, and a wall behind us that we didn't care about. I had sung the first verse of my Neapolitan song at the top of my voice and was about to start the second, when all of a sudden we heard a shout behind us, beyond the wall; then the second verse was sung, faintly and with a strange voice:
Vorria arreventare no piccinotto,
Cona lancella oghi vennenno acqua.
What voice could it be?
"Arthur?" asked Mattia.
But no, it wasn't Arthur, I didn't recognise his voice, and yet Capi let out muffled sighs and gave every sign of lively joy as he jumped against the wall.
Unable to contain myself, I cried out:
"Who's that singing?
And the voice replied:
"Rémi!
My name instead of an answer. Mattia and I looked at each other dumbfounded.
As we stood stupidly facing each other, I saw behind Mattia, at the end of the wall and over a low hedge, a white handkerchief fluttering in the wind.
It was only when we reached the hedge that we could see the person whose arm was waving the handkerchief - Lise!
At last we had found her, and with her Mrs Milligan and Arthur.
But who had sung? That was the question Mattia and I put to her at once, as soon as we could find a word to say.
"Me," she said.
Lise was singing! Lise was talking!
It is true that I had heard a thousand times that Lise would one day recover her speech, and very probably under the shock of a violent emotion; but I would not have believed it possible.
And yet here it was; here she was speaking; here the miracle had been accomplished; and it was when she heard me singing, when she saw me coming back to her, when she might have thought I was lost forever, that she had experienced this violent emotion!
I was so shaken by the thought that I had to hold on to a branch of the hedge with my hand.
But this was no time for surrender:
Where is Mrs. Milligan?" I said, "where is Arthur?
Lise moved her lips to answer, but all that came out of her mouth was slurred speech.
Then, impatient, she used her hands to explain herself and make herself understood more quickly, as her tongue and mind were still ill-equipped to use speech.
As I followed her language with my eyes, which Mattia did not hear, I saw a small long carriage being pushed by a servant in the garden, at a bend in a wooded path. In this carriage lay Arthur, and behind him came his mother and... I leaned forward to get a better look... and Mr James Milligan; instantly I ducked behind the hedge and told Mattia, in a hurried voice, to do the same, without thinking that Mr James Milligan did not know Mattia.
After my initial fright, I realised that Lise must have been surprised at our sudden disappearance. So, raising my voice a little, I said to her half aloud:
"Mr James Milligan must not see me, or* *he may make me go back to England.
She raised both her arms in a frightened gesture.
"Tomorrow morning at nine o'clock we shall return to this place; try to be alone; now go away.
She hesitated.
You know," said Mattia, "that I'm not at all prepared to wait until tomorrow to see Mrs Milligan; in the meantime Mr James Milligan might kill Arthur; I'm going to see Mrs Milligan at once and tell her everything we know. As Mr Milligan has never seen me, there is no danger of his thinking of you and the Driscoll family; it will be Mrs Milligan who will then decide what we are to do."
It was obvious that there was some good in what Mattia was proposing, so I let him go and arranged to meet him in a group of chestnut trees a short distance away. There, if by any chance I saw Mr James Milligan coming, I could hide.
I waited a long time, lying on the moss, for Mattia to return, and more than ten times I had already wondered if we had not made a mistake, when at last I saw him come back accompanied by Mrs Milligan.
I ran to meet her and, seizing the hand she held out to me, kissed it; but she took me in her arms and, leaning towards me, kissed me tenderly on the forehead.
It was the second time she had kissed me, but it seemed to me that the first time she had not hugged me like that.
"Poor dear child," she said.
And with her soft white fingers she parted my hair and looked at me for a long time.
My child," she said, without taking her eyes off me, "your friend has told me some very serious things. Would you like to tell me about your arrival in the Driscoll family and also about Mr James Milligan's visit?
I gave the account I had been asked to give, and Mrs Milligan only interrupted me to force me to clarify a few important points. No one had ever listened to me so attentively, and her eyes never left mine.
When I fell silent, she remained silent for quite a long time, still looking at me:
"All this is extremely serious for you, for all of us: we must therefore act only with prudence and after consulting people who can guide us; but, until this moment, you must consider yourself as Arthur's comrade, as Arthur's friend -- she hesitated a little -- as Arthur's brother, and you must, from today, abandon, you and your young friend, your miserable existence. In two hours' time you will come to Territet, to the Hotel des Alpes, where I will send a reliable person to hold your lodgings for you; that is where we will meet again, as I am obliged to leave you.
She kissed me again and, after giving Mattia her hand, she left quickly.
The next day Mrs Milligan came to see us, accompanied by a tailor and a linen maid, who measured us for clothes and shirts.
She told us that Lise was still trying to talk, and that the doctor had assured us that she was now cured; then, after spending an hour with us, she left us, kissing me tenderly and giving Mattia her hand.
She came in this way for four days, each time showing herself more affectionate and tender towards me, but with something awkward about her, as if she didn't want to give in to this tenderness and let it show.
On the fifth day, the chambermaid I had seen on the Swan came in her place, and told us that Mrs Milligan was expecting us at her house, and that a carriage was at the hotel door to take us. It was an open carriage in which Mattia sat down without surprise and very nobly, as if he had been riding in a coach since he was a child; Capi also climbed onto one of the cushions without embarrassment.
The journey was short; it seemed very short to me, for I was walking in a dream, my head full of crazy ideas, or at least ideas that I thought were crazy; we were ushered into a sitting room, where Mrs Milligan was, Arthur was lying on a sofa, and Lise.
Arthur held out both his arms to me; I ran to him to kiss him; I kissed Lise too, but it was Mrs Milligan who kissed me.
At last," she said, "the time has come for you to take your rightful place.
And as I looked at her to ask for an explanation of these words, she went to open a door, and I saw Mother Barberin enter, carrying in her arms a child's clothes, a white cashmere wrap, a lace bonnet and knitted slippers.
As I kissed her, Mrs Milligan gave an order to a servant, and all I heard was the name of Mr James Milligan, which made me turn pale.
You have nothing to fear," she said gently, "on the contrary, come here beside me and put your hand in mine.
At that moment the door of the drawing room opened in front of Mr James Milligan, smiling and showing his sharp teeth; he saw me, and instantly that smile was replaced by a frightening grimace.
Mrs Milligan gave him no time to speak.
I have sent for you," she said, in a slow voice that trembled slightly, "to present my eldest son, whom I have at last had the good fortune to find," she shook my hand, "and here he is, but you know him already, since you went to see the man who stole him and inquired after his health.
- What does this mean?" said Mr James Milligan, his face broken.
This man, now in prison for a theft committed in a church, made a full confession; here's a letter confirming it; he said how he had stolen this child, how he had taken precautions by cutting the marks off the child's linen so that it wouldn't be discovered. Here again are these cloths which were kept by the excellent woman who generously brought up my son; would you like to see this letter? would you like to see these cloths?"
Mr. James Milligan stood still for a moment, wondering whether he would not strangle us all:
We'll see," he said, "what the courts think of this childish supposition.
Unperturbed, Mrs Milligan -- now I can say my mother -- replied:
"You can take us to court, but I'm not taking my husband's brother to court.
The door closed on my uncle, and I was able to throw myself into my mother's arms and kiss her for the first time as she kissed me.
XXI -- With my family
The years have gone by -- many, but short, for they have been filled with nothing but beautiful, sweet days.
I am now living in England, in Milligan Park, my fathers' manor.
The little wretch who, as a child, spent so many nights in barns, stables or on the edge of a wood under the stars, is now the heir to an old historic castle that is visited by the curious and recommended by guidebooks.
My mother, my brother, my wife and I live in this old manor house in Milligan Park.
In the six months since we moved in, I've spent many an hour in the charters room, where the charters, the title deeds and the family papers are kept, bent over a large oak table blackened by the years, busy writing; but it's not these charters or these family papers that I'm laboriously consulting, it's the book of my memories that I'm leafing through and putting in order.
We are about to christen our first child, our son, little Mattia, and on the occasion of this christening, which will bring together all those who have been my friends in the bad old days, I want to offer each of them an account of the adventures in which they were involved, as a token of my gratitude for the help they gave me or the affection they had for the poor lost child. When I have finished a chapter, I send it to Dorchester, to the lithographer; and that very day I wait for the autographed copies of my manuscript to give one to each of my guests.
This meeting is a surprise for them, and also for my wife, who is going to see her father, her sister, her brothers and her aunt, whom she is not expecting; only my mother and my brother are in the know. If there are no complications, everyone will be staying under my roof this evening and I'll have the pleasure of seeing them at my table.
Only one will miss the party, for however great the power of fortune may be, it cannot restore life to those who are no more. Poor dear old master, how happy I would have been to ensure your repose! You would have put down the piva, the sheepskin and the velvet jacket; you would no longer have repeated: "Forward, my children! An honoured old age would have allowed you to raise your beautiful white head and take back your name; Vitalis, the old vagabond, would have once again become Carlo Balzani, the famous singer. But what merciless death did not allow me to do for you, I did at least for your memory; and in Paris, in the Montparnasse cemetery, the name Carlo Balzani is inscribed on the tomb that my mother, at my request, raised for you; and your bronze bust, sculpted after the portraits published at the time of your fame, recalls your glory to those who applauded you. A copy of this bust was cast for me; it is there in front of me; and, in writing the account of my first years of trials, as events unfolded, my eyes often sought yours. If I have not stumbled or fallen in this perilous existence of a lost child, it is to you that I owe it, to your lessons, to your examples, O my old master! and at any celebration your place will be piously reserved.
But here is my mother, advancing into the portrait gallery; age has not dimmed her beauty; and I see her today as she first appeared to me, on the veranda of the Swan, with her noble air, so full of gentleness and goodness; only the veil of melancholy then continually lowered over her face has faded.
She leaned on Arthur's arm, for now it was no longer the mother who was supporting her debilitated and tottering son, but the son, now a handsome and vigorous young man, skilled in all the exercises of the body, an elegant squire, a strong oarsman, an intrepid hunter, who, with affectionate solicitude, offered his arm to his mother: thus, contrary to the prognosis of our uncle Mr. James Milligan, the miracle took place. James Milligan, the miracle had been accomplished: Arthur had lived, and he would live.
Some distance behind them, I saw an old woman dressed like a French peasant woman and carrying on her arms a tiny child wrapped in a white blanket; the old peasant woman was Mother Barberin, and the child was mine, my son, little Mattia.
After finding my mother, I wanted Mother Barberin to stay with us, but she wouldn't agree.
No," she said, "my little Rémi, I don't belong with your mother at the moment. You're going to have to work to educate yourself and to become a real gentleman by education, as you are one by birth. What would I do with you? I don't belong in your real mother's house. Let me go back to Chavanon. But if you do, our separation may not be for ever. You will grow up; you will marry and have children. Then, if you want me to, and if I'm still alive, I'll come back and raise your children. I won't be able to be their nurse as I was yours, because I'll be old; but old age doesn't prevent you from looking after a child well; you have experience; you don't sleep too much. And then I'll love your child, and I'm not the one, you can be sure, who'll let me steal him as I've stolen you.
Shortly before the birth of our child, we went to look for her in Chavanon, and she left everything, her village, her habits, her friends, the cow she had bred from ours, to come to England to be with us. Our little Mattia is fed by his mother, but he is looked after, carried, amused and cajoled by Mother Barberin, who declares that he is the most beautiful child she has ever seen.
Arthur holds an issue of The Times in his hand; he lays it on my work table, asking me if I have read it, and, when I reply in the negative, he points to a piece of correspondence from Vienna, which I translate:
"You will soon have a visit from Mattia in London; despite the prodigious success of his concert series here, he is leaving us, called away to England by engagements he cannot miss. I have already spoken to you about these concerts; they caused a sensation as much for the power and originality of the virtuoso as for the talent of the composer; in a word, Mattia is the Chopin of the violin.
At that moment, a servant handed me a telegraphic dispatch that had just been brought in:
"It may be the shortest crossing, but it's not the most pleasant. In any case, I have been so ill that it is only at Red Hill that I find the strength to warn you; I have taken Cristina when passing through Paris; we shall arrive at Chegford at ten minutes past four, send a carriage to meet us.
"Mattia."
As I spoke of Cristina I looked at Arthur, but he looked away, and it was only when I got to the end of the despatch that he looked up again.
I want to go to Chegford myself," he said, "I'll get the pram hitched up.
- That's an excellent idea; you'll be able to see Cristina on the way back.
Without replying, he left quickly, and I turned to my mother.
You can see," I said, "that Arthur makes no secret of his eagerness; that's significant.
But my mother interrupted me.
"Here is your wife," she said.
My wife, you've guessed it, and there's no need for me to tell you, is there? My wife is the little girl with the astonished eyes and the speaking face that you know, it's Lise, little Lise, fine, light, airy. Lise is no longer mute, but fortunately she has retained her finesse and lightness that give her beauty something heavenly. Lise has never left my mother, who had her brought up and educated before her eyes, and she has become a beautiful young girl, the most beautiful of young girls, endowed for me with all the qualities, all the merits, all the virtues, because I love her.
"Arthur has just left for Chegford station, and the station wagon has been sent to Ferry station. What is this mystery, pray?"
The hour had passed, and the station wagon I had sent to Ferry, to meet Lise's family, was due to arrive at any moment. So, wanting to play with this curiosity, I took a spyglass that we use to follow ships passing offshore; but, instead of pointing it out to sea, I turned it towards the path where the station wagon was due to arrive.
Look through this telescope," I said, "and your curiosity will be satisfied.
She looked, but couldn't see anything but the white road, as no car had yet appeared.
So I put my eye to the eyepiece:
"How could you not see anything through this telescope? It's a lovely house near Sceaux that I see; a white-haired man is hurrying two women around him: "Let's go quickly," he says, "we'll miss the train, and I won't get to England for my grandson's christening; Lady Catherine, please hurry up a little; in the ten years we've lived together, you've always been late. What do you mean, Étiennette? There's Miss Gendarme again! My reproach to Catherine is a friendly one. Don't I know that Catherine is the best of sisters, just as you, Tiennette, are the best of daughters? Where does one find a good girl like you, who doesn't marry to look after her old father, continuing the role of guardian angel that she fulfilled as a child with her brothers and sister?
"Then, before he leaves, he gives instructions for his flowers to be cared for during his absence: "Don't forget that I used to be a gardener," he tells his servant, "and that I know the work.
I shift the telescope as if I wanted to look at another side:
Now," I said, "it's a steamer I see, a large one returning from the West Indies and approaching Le Havre: on board is a young man returning from a botanical exploration trip in the Amazon region: He is said to be bringing back a whole flora unknown in Europe, and the first part of his journey, published in the newspapers, is very curious; his name, Benjamin Acquin, is already famous; he has only one worry: whether he will arrive in time at Le Havre to take the Southampton boat and join his family at Milligan-Park; my telescope is so marvellous that it follows him; he has taken the Southampton boat; he will arrive. "
Again my telescope is pointed in another direction and I continue:
"Not only do I see, but I hear: two men are in the carriage, an old man and a young man: "How interesting this journey is going to be for us! says the old man. -- Very interesting, magister. -- Not only, my dear Alexis, are you going to embrace your family, not only are we going to shake hands with Rémi, who has not forgotten us, but we are also going down to the mines in Wales; you will make some curious observations there, and, on your return, you will be able to make improvements to the Truyère, which will give authority to the position you have won through your work; as for me, I will bring back some samples and add them to my collection that the town of Varses has kindly accepted. It's a shame Gaspard couldn't come".
I was about to continue, but Lise had come up to me; she took my head in both her hands and, by her caress, prevented me from speaking.
Oh, what a sweet surprise!" she said, her voice trembling with emotion.
-- If you hadn't kept your mouth shut, you would have learned that we were also expecting that excellent Bob, who has become the most famous showman in England.
We ran to the window and saw the station wagon in which Lise recognised her father, her aunt Catherine, her sister Étiennette and her brothers Alexis and Benjamin. On the opposite side of the room comes the open pram in which Mattia and Cristina are waving at us. Then, behind the pram, came a cabriolet driven by Bob himself; Bob looked every inch a gentleman.
We hurried down the stairs to meet our guests at the bottom of the porch.
Dinner brings us all together at the same table, and naturally we talk about the past.
I met a gentleman in Baden recently," says Mattia, "with sharp white teeth who was always smiling in spite of his bad luck; he didn't recognise me, and he did me the honour of asking me for a florin to play on a sure combination; it was a partnership; it wasn't a happy one: Mr James Milligan lost.
- Why are you telling this to Rémi, my dear Mattia?" said my mother; "he is capable of sending help to his uncle.
- Perfectly, dear mother.
- So where will atonement lie?" asked my mother.
- In the fact that my uncle, who sacrificed everything for his fortune, will owe his bread to those he persecuted and whose death he wanted.
- I've heard from his accomplices," said Bob.
- From the horrible Driscoll?" asked Mattia.
- Not of Driscoll himself, who must still be over seas, but of the Driscoll family; Mrs Driscoll burned to death one day when she lay in the fire instead of on the table, and Allen and Ned have just been sentenced to deportation; they'll join their father.
- And Kate?
- Little Kate looks after her grandfather, who is still alive; she lives with him in the Red Lion Court; the old man has money, so they are not unhappy."
When dinner was over, Mattia came up to me and, taking me aside in a window embrasure, said:
I have an idea," he said. "We have so often made music for those who are indifferent that we should make a little for those we love.
- So there's no pleasure without music for you? all the same, everywhere and always music; remember the fear of our cow.
- Would you like to play your Neapolitan song?
- I'd love to, because it gave Lise back her voice.
And we take our instruments; in a beautiful velvet-lined box, Mattia reaches an old violin that would be worth two francs, if we wanted to sell it, and I remove from its wrapping a harp whose wood, washed by the rains, has regained its natural colour.
Everyone circled round us, but just then a dog, a poodle called Capi, appeared. He's quite old, good Capi, he's deaf, but he's still got good eyesight; from the cushion on which he lives he recognises his harp, and he comes hobbling along "for the show"; he's holding a saucer in his mouth; he wants to go round "the honourable company" by walking on his hind legs, but he lacks strength; so he sits down and, greeting "the company" gravely, he puts a paw over his heart.
Everyone put their offering in the saucer, and Capi, amazed at the proceeds, brought it to me. It's the best he's ever made; there are only gold and silver coins: -- 170 francs!
I kissed him on the nose, as I used to do when he consoled me, and this memory of the miseries of my childhood suggested an idea that I immediately explained:
"This sum will be the first instalment intended to found a home and refuge for the little street musicians; my mother and I will do the rest.
- Dear Madam," said Mattia, kissing my mother's hand, "I'm asking you for a very small share in your work; if you don't mind, the proceeds from my first concert in London will be added to Capi's takings.
One page was missing from my manuscript, the one that was to contain my Neapolitan song; Mattia, a better musician than I, wrote this song, and here it is:
